Index to emergency topics

‘Don’t go so fast: we’re in a hurry!’—Talleyrand to his coachman.

Acute abdomen  606
Acute kidney injury  298
Addisonian crisis  836
Anaphylaxis  794
Aneurysm, abdominal aortic  654
intracranial/extradural  78, 482
gastrointestinal  256, 820
rectal  629
variceal  257, 820

Antidotes, poisoning  842
Arrhythmias, broad complex  128, 804
narrow complex, SVT  126, 806

Asthma  810
Asystole  895
Atrial ﬂ utter/ﬁ brillation 
Bacterial shock  790
Blast injury  851
Bradycardia  124
Burns  846
Cardiac arrest  894 (Fig A3)
Cardiogenic tamponade  802
Cardioversion, DC  770
Central line insertion (CVP line)   774
Cerebral oedema  830
Chest drain  766
Coma  786
Cricothyrotomy  772
Cyanosis  186–9
Cut-down  761
Deﬁ brillation  770, 894 (Fig A3)
Diabetes emergencies  832–4
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy 

(DIC)  352
Disaster, major  850
Encephalitis  824
Epilepsy, status  826
Extradural haemorrhage  482
Fluids, IV  666, 790
Haematemesis  256–7
Haemorrhage  790
Hyperthermia  790, 838
Hypoglycaemia  214, 834
Hypothermia  848
Intracranial pressure, raised  830
Ischaemic limb  656
Malaria  416
Malignant hyperpyrexia  572

Malignant hypertension  140
Meningitis  822
Meningococcaemia  822
Myocardial infarction  796
Needle pericardiocentesis  773
Neutropenic sepsis  352
Obstructive uropathy  641
Oncological emergencies  528
Opioid poisoning  842
Overdose  838–44
Pacemaker, temporary  776
Pericardiocentesis  773
Phaeochromocytoma  837
Pneumonia  816
Pneumothorax  814
Poisoning  838–44
Potassium, hyperkalaemia  674

hypokalaemia  674

Pulmonary embolism  818
Respiratory arrest  894 (Fig A3)
Respiratory failure  188
Resuscitation  894 (Fig A3)
Rheumatological emergencies  538
Shock  790
Smoke inhalation  847
Sodium, hypernatraemia  672

hyponatraemia  672

Spinal cord compression  466, 543
Status asthmaticus  810
Status epilepticus  826
Stroke  470
Superior vena cava obstruction  528
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)  806
Testicular torsion  652
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 

(TTP)  315
Thyroid storm  834
Transfusion reaction  349
Varices, bleeding  257, 820
Vasculitis, acute systemic  556
Venous thromboembolism, leg  656

pulmonary  818

Ventricular arrhythmias  128, 804
Ventricular failure, left  800
Ventricular ﬁ brillation  894 (Fig A3)
Ventricular tachycardia  128, 804

_OHCM_10e.indb   b

_OHCM_10e.indb   b

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Common haematology values
Haemoglobin 

men:
women:

Mean cell volume, MCV
Platelets
White cells (total)
neutrophils
lymphocytes
eosinophils

Blood gases
pH
PaO2
PaCO2
Base excess

U&ES (urea and electrolytes)
Sodium
Potassium
Creatinine
Urea
eGFR

LFTS (liver function tests)
Bilirubin
Alanine aminotransferase, ALT
Aspartate transaminase, AST
Alkaline phosphatase, ALP

Albumin

Cardiac enzymes
Troponin T

Other biochemical values
Cholesterol
Triglycerides
Amylase
C-reactive protein, CRP
Corrected calcium
Glucose, fasting
Thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH

130–180g/L
115–160g/L
76–96fL
150–400 ≈ 109/L
4–11 ≈ 109/L
2.0–7.5 ≈ 109/L
1.0–4.5 ≈ 109/L
0.04–0.4 ≈ 109/L

7.35–7.45
>10.6kPa
4.7–6kPa
± 2mmol/L

135–145mmol/L
3.5–5.3mmol/L
70–100μmol/L
2.5–6.7mmol/L
>60

3–17μmol/L
5–35IU/L
5–35IU/L
30–130IU/L 
(non-pregnant adults)
35–50g/L

<99th percentile of 
upper reference limit: 
value depends on local 
assay

<5mmol/L
Fasting: 0.5–2.3mmol/L
0–180 IU/dL
<10mg/L
2.12–2.60mmol/L
3.5–5.5mmol/L
0.5–4.2mU/L

p324
p324
p326; p332
p364
p330
p330
p330
p330

p670
p670
p670
p670

p672
p674
p298–301
p298–301
p669

p272, p274
p272, p274
p272, p274
p272, p274

p686

p119

p690
p690
p636
p686
p676
p206
p216

For all other reference intervals, see p750–7

_OHCM_10e.indb   c

_OHCM_10e.indb   c

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
He moved N. 48
all the brightest gems N. 24
faster and faster towards the N. 18
ever-growing bucket of lost hopes;
had there been just one more year N. 14
of peace the battalion would have made
a floating system of perpetual drainage.

N. 12

A silent fall of immense snow came near oily
remains of the recently eaten supper on the table.

N. 10

We drove on in our old sunless walnut. Presently
classical eggs ticked in the new afternoon shadows.

We were instructed by my cousin Jasper not to exercise by country
house visiting unless accompanied by thirteen geese or gangsters.

The modern American did not prevail over the pair of redundant bronze puppies.
The worn-out principle is a bad omen which I am never glad to ransom in August.

N. 8

N. 6

N. 5

Reading tests Hold this chart (well-illuminated) 30cm away, and record the smallest 
type read (eg N12 left eye, N6 right eye, spectacles worn) or object named accurately.

_OHCM_10e.indb   d

_OHCM_10e.indb   d

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

OXFORD HANDBOOK OF 
CLINICAL
MEDICINE

TENTH EDITION

Ian B. Wilkinson

Tim Raine

Kate Wiles

Anna Goodhart

Catriona Hall 

Harriet O’Neill

3

_OHCM_10e.indb   i

_OHCM_10e.indb   i

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Oxford University Press, Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford  University  Press  is  a  department  of  the  University  of  Oxford.  It  furthers 
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by 
publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries.
Published in the United States by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press, 2017
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 1985
(RA Hope & JM Longmore)
Second edition 1989
Third edition 1993
Fourth edition 1998

Fifth edition 2001
(JM Longmore & IB Wilkinson) (IB Wilkinson, T Raine & K Wiles)
Sixth edition 2004
Seventh edition 2007
Eighth edition 2010
Ninth edition 2014

Tenth edition 2017

Translations:
Chinese
Czech
Estonian

French
German
Greek

Hungarian
Russian
Polish
Indonesian Portuguese Spanish
Romanian
Italian

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  publication  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, 
or  under  terms  agreed  with  the  appropriate  reprographics  rights  organization. 
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent 
to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017939060
Typeset  by  GreenGate  Publishing  Services,  Tonbridge,  UK;  printed  in  China  by 
C&C Off set Printing Co. Ltd.
ISBN 978-0-19-968990-3

Drugs
Except where otherwise stated, recommendations are for the non-pregnant adult 
who is not breastfeeding and who has reasonable renal and hepatic function.
We have made every eff ort to check this text, but it is still possible that drug or 
other errors have been missed. OUP makes no representation, express or implied, 
that doses are correct. Readers are urged to check with the most up to date prod-
uct information, codes of conduct, and safety regulations. The authors and the 
publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the text, 
or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work.
For updates/corrections, see http://www.oup.co.uk/academic/series/oxhmed/updates/

_OHCM_10e.indb   ii

_OHCM_10e.indb   ii

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Contents

Each chapter’s contents are detailed on its ﬁ rst page

Prefaces to the ﬁ rst and tenth editions 
Acknowledgements  v
Symbols and abbreviations  vi

iv

1 Thinking about medicine

2 History and examination

3 Cardiovascular medicine

4 Chest medicine

5 Endocrinology

6 Gastroenterology

7 Renal medicine

8 Haematology

9 Infectious diseases

10 Neurology

11 Oncology and palliative care

12 Rheumatology

13 Surgery

14 Clinical chemistry

15 Eponymous syndromes

16 Radiology

17 Reference intervals, etc.

18 Practical procedures

19 Emergencies

20 References

Index  868
Early warning score  892
Cardiac arrest  894

0

24

92

160

202

242

292

322

378

444

518

538

564

662

694

718

750

758

778

852

_OHCM_10e.indb   iii

_OHCM_10e.indb   iii

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Preface to the tenth edition

This is the ﬁ rst edition of the book without either of the original authors—Tony Hope 
and Murray Longmore. Both have now moved on to do other things, and enjoy a 
well-earned rest from authorship. In this book, I am joined by a Nephrologist, Gas-
troenterologist, and trainees destined for careers in Cardiology, Dermatology, and 
General Practice. Five physicians, each with very diff erent interests and approaches, 
yet bringing their own knowledge, expertise, and styles. When combined with that 
of our specialist and junior readers, I hope this creates a book that is greater than 
the sum of its parts, yet true to the original concept and ethos of the original authors. 
Life and medicine have moved on in the 30 years since the ﬁ rst edition was published, 
but medicine and science are largely iterative; true novel ‘ground-breaking’ or ‘prac-
tice-changing’ discoveries are rare, to quote Isaac Newton: ‘If I have seen further, it 
is by standing on the shoulders of giants’. Therefore, when we set about writing this 
edition we drew inspiration from the original book and its authors; updating, adding, 
and clarifying, but trying to retain the unique feel and perspective that the OHCM has 
provided to generations of trainees and clinicians.

IBW, 2017

Preface to the ﬁ rst edition
We wrote this book not because we know so much, but because we know we 
remember so little…the problem is not simply the quantity of information, but the 
diversity of places from which it is dispensed. Trailing eagerly behind the surgeon, 
the student is admonished never to forget alcohol withdrawal as a cause of post-
operative confusion. The scrap of paper on which this is written spends a month 
in the pocket before being lost for ever in the laundry. At diff erent times, and in 
inconvenient places, a number of other causes may be presented to the student. 
Not only are these causes and aphorisms never brought together, but when, as a 
surgical house offi  cer, the former student faces a confused patient, none is to hand.
We aim to encourage the doctor to enjoy his patients: in doing so we believe he 
will prosper in the practice of medicine. For a long time now, house offi  cers have 
been encouraged to adopt monstrous proportions in order to straddle the diverse 
pinnacles of clinical science and clinical experience. We hope that this book will 
make this endeavour a little easier by moving a cumulative memory burden from 
the mind into the pocket, and by removing some of the fears that are naturally felt 
when starting a career in medicine, thereby freely allowing the doctor’s clinical 
acumen to grow by the slow accretion of many, many days and nights.

RA Hope and JM Longmore, 1985

_OHCM_10e.indb   iv

_OHCM_10e.indb   iv

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Acknowledgements

Heart-felt  thanks  to  our  advisers  on  speciﬁ c  sections—each  is  acknowledged  on 
the chapter’s ﬁ rst page. Thanks also to our junior readers, Charles Badu-Boateng, 
Clare  Coggins,  and  Luke  Walls.  We  especially  thank  all  our  mentors  and  teach-
ers, and patients who provide our inspiration and remind us that one never stops 
learning. We acknowledge the Department of Radiology at both the Leeds Teach-
ing Hospitals NHS Trust and the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital for their 
kind help in providing many images, particularly Dr Edmund Godfrey, whose tire-
less hunt for perfect images has improved so many chapters.
Readers’ comments These have formed a vital part of our endeavour to provide 
an accurate, comprehensive, and up-to-date text. We sincerely thank the many stu-
dents,  doctors,  and  other  health  professionals  who  have  found  the  time  and  the 
generosity to write to us on our Reader’s Comments Cards, in editions past, or, in 
more recent times, via the web. These have now become so numerous for past edi-
tions that they cannot all be listed. See  http://www.oup.com/uk/academic/series/
oxhmed/links for a full list, and our very heart-felt tokens of thanks.
3rd-party web addresses We disclaim any responsibility for 3rd-party content.

_OHCM_10e.indb   v

_OHCM_10e.indb   v

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
Symbols and abbreviations

..........this fact or idea is important
 .......don’t dawdle!—prompt action saves lives
1  ...........reference
:......male-to-female ratio. :=2:1 means twice as 

common in males

  .........therefore
~  ..........approximately
–ve  ......negative (+ve is positive)
  ........increased or decreased
  .......normal (eg serum level)
1°  ........primary
2°  ........secondary
 ..........diagnosis
 ........diff erential diagnosis
A:CR  ......albumin to creatinine ratio (mg/mmol)
A2  .........aortic component of the 2nd heart sound
Ab  ......antibody
ABC ......airway, breathing, and circulation
ABG  .....arterial blood gas: PaO2, PaCO2, pH, HCO3
ABPA ....allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
ACE-i  .....angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
ACS  .......acute coronary syndrome
ACTH ....adrenocorticotrophic hormone
ADH  .....antidiuretic hormone
AF  ........atrial ﬁ brillation
AFB  ......acid-fast bacillus
Ag .......antigen
AIDS  ....acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome
AKI  ........acute kidney injury
ALL  ......acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
ALP  ......alkaline phosphatase
AMA  ....antimitochondrial antibody
AMP  .....adenosine monophosphate
ANA  .....antinuclear antibody
ANCA  ...antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
APTT  ....activated partial thromboplastin time
AR ........aortic regurgitation
ARB  .....angiotensin II receptor ‘blocker’ (antagonist)
ARDS  ...acute respiratory distress syndrome
ART  ......antiretroviral therapy
AS  ........aortic stenosis
ASD  .....atrial septal defect
AST  ......aspartate transaminase
ATN  ......acute tubular necrosis
ATP  ......adenosine triphosphate
AV  ........atrioventricular
AVM  .....arteriovenous malformation(s)
AXR  .....abdominal X-ray (plain)
Ba ........barium
BAL  ......bronchoalveolar lavage
bd  .......bis die (Latin for twice a day)
BKA  .....below-knee amputation
BNF  ......British National Formulary
BNP ......brain natriuretic peptide
BP  ........blood pressure
BPH ......benign prostatic hyperplasia
bpm ....beats per minute
ca  ........cancer
CABG  ...coronary artery bypass graft
cAMP ...cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
CAPD  ...continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
CCF  ......congestive cardiac failure (ie left and right heart 

failure)

CCU  ......coronary care unit
CDT  ......Clostridium difﬁ cile toxin
CHB ......complete heart block
CHD ......coronary heart disease
CI .........contraindications
CK  ........creatine (phospho)kinase
CKD  ......chronic kidney disease
CLL  ......chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
CML  .....chronic myeloid leukaemia
CMV  .....cytomegalovirus
CNS  ......central nervous system
COC  ......combined oral contraceptive pill
COPD ....chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CPAP  ....continuous positive airway pressure
CPR  ......cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CRP  ......c-reactive protein
CSF  ......cerebrospinal ﬂ uid
CT  ........computed tomography
CVA ......cerebrovascular accident
CVP  ......central venous pressure
CVS  ......cardiovascular system
CXR  ......chest x-ray
d  ..........day(s); also expressed as /7; months are /12
DC  ........direct current
DIC  ......disseminated intravascular coagulation
DIP  ......distal interphalangeal
dL  .......decilitre
DM  .......diabetes mellitus
DOAC  ...direct oral anticoagulant

DU  ........duodenal ulcer
D&V  .....diarrhoea and vomiting
DVT  ......deep venous thrombosis
DXT  ......deep radiotherapy
EBV  ......Epstein–Barr virus
ECG  ......electrocardiogram
Echo  ...echocardiogram
EDTA  ....ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (anticoagulant 

coating, eg in FBC bottles)

EEG  ......electroencephalogram
eGFR  ....estimated glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (in mL/

min/1.73m2)

ELISA ...enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EM  .......electron microscope
EMG  .....electromyogram
ENT  ......ear, nose, and throat
ERCP  ....endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
ESR  ......erythrocyte sedimentation rate
ESRF  ....end-stage renal failure
EUA ......examination under anaesthesia
FBC  ......full blood count
FDP  ......ﬁ brin degradation products
FEV1  .....forced expiratory volume in 1st sec
FiO2  ....partial pressure of O2 in inspired air
FFP  ......fresh frozen plasma
FSH  ......follicle-stimulating hormone
FVC  ......forced vital capacity
g ..........gram
G6PD ....glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
GA  .......general anaesthetic
GCS  ......Glasgow Coma Scale
GFR  ......glomerular ﬁ ltration rate
GGT  ......gamma-glutamyl transferase
GH ........growth hormone
GI  ........gastrointestinal
GN ........glomerulonephritis
GP  ........general practitioner
GPA  ......granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly 

Wegener’s granulomatosis)

GTN  ......glyceryl trinitrate
GTT  ......glucose tolerance test
GU(M)  ..genitourinary (medicine)
h  ..........hour
HAV  .....hepatitis A virus
Hb  .......haemoglobin
HbA1c  .glycated haemoglobin
HBSAg  ..hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV  .....hepatitis B virus
HCC  ......hepatocellular cancer
HCM  .....hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Hct  ......haematocrit
HCV ......hepatitis C virus
HDV  .....hepatitis D virus
HDL  ......high-density lipoprotein
HHT ......hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
HIV  ......human immunodeﬁ ciency virus
HLA  ......human leucocyte antigen
HONK  ...hyperosmolar non-ketotic (coma)
HPV ......human papillomavirus
HRT  ......hormone replacement therapy
HSP  ......Henoch–Schönlein purpura
HSV  ......herpes simplex virus
HUS ......haemolytic uraemic syndrome
IBD  ......inﬂ ammatory bowel disease
IBW  .....ideal body weight
ICD  ......implantable cardiac deﬁ brillator
ICP .......intracranial pressure
IC(T)U  ..intensive care unit
IDDM  ...insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
IFN-  ..interferon alpha
IE  .........infective endocarditis
Ig  ........immunoglobulin
IHD  ......ischaemic heart disease
IM  ........intramuscular
INR  ......international normalized ratio
IP .........interphalangeal
IPPV  ....intermittent positive pressure ventilation
ITP .......idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
IU  ........international unit
IVC  ......inferior vena cava
IV(I)  ....intravenous (infusion)
IVU  ......intravenous urography
JVP  ......jugular venous pressure
K  ..........potassium
kg  .......kilogram
KPa  ......kiloPascal
L  ..........litre
LAD  ........left axis deviation on the ECG
LBBB  ....left bundle branch block
LDH  ......lactate dehydrogenase
LDL  ......low-density lipoprotein
LFT  ......liver function test

_OHCM_10e.indb   vi

_OHCM_10e.indb   vi

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

LH  ........luteinizing hormone
LIF  .......left iliac fossa
LKKS  ....liver, kidney (R), kidney (L), spleen
LMN  .....lower motor neuron
LMWH  ..low-molecular-weight heparin
LOC  ......loss of consciousness
LP  ........lumbar puncture
LUQ  ......left upper quadrant
LV  ........left ventricle of the heart
LVF .......left ventricular failure
LVH  ......left ventricular hypertrophy
MAI  .....Mycobacterium avium intracellulare
MALT  ...mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
mane  ..morning (from Latin)
MAOI  ...monoamine oxidase inhibitor
MAP  .....mean arterial pressure
MC&S ...microscopy, culture, and sensitivity
mcg  ....microgram
MCP  .....metacarpo-phalangeal
MCV  .....mean cell volume
MDMA  ..3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
ME  .......myalgic encephalomyelitis
mg  ......milligram
MI  ........myocardial infarction
min(s)  minute(s)
mL .......millilitre
mmHg  millimetres of mercury
MND .....motor neuron disease
MR  .......modiﬁ ed release or mitral regurgitation
MRCP  ...magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
MRI ......magnetic resonance imaging
MRSA  ...meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus
MS  .......multiple sclerosis
MSM  ....men who have sex with men
MSU  .....midstream urine
N&V  .....nausea and/or vomiting
NAD  .....nothing abnormal detected
NBM  .....nil by mouth
ND ........notiﬁ able disease
NEWS  ..National Early Warning Score
ng  .......nanogram
NG ........nasogastric
NHS  .....National Health Service (UK)
NICE  ....National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 

http://www.nice.org.uk

NIDDM  .non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
NMDA  .. N-methyl-D-aspartate
NNT  .....number needed to treat
nocte ..at night
NR  ........normal range (=reference interval)
NSAID  ..non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drug
OCP  ......oral contraceptive pill
od  .......omni die (Latin for once daily)
OGD  .....oesophagogastroduodenoscopy
OGTT  ....oral glucose tolerance test
OHCS ....Oxford Handbook of Clinical Specialties
om  ......omni mane (in the morning)
on  .......omni nocte (at night)
OPD ......outpatients department
OT  ........occupational therapist
P:CR  .....protein to creatinine ratio (mg/mmol)
P2  .........pulmonary component of 2nd heart sound
PaCO2 ...partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood
PAN  ......polyarteritis nodosa
PaO2  .....partial pressure of O2 in arterial blood
PBC  ......primary biliary cirrhosis
PCR  ......polymerase chain reaction
PCV  ......packed cell volume
PE  ........pulmonary embolism
PEEP  ....positive end-expiratory pressure
PEF(R)  ..peak expiratory ﬂ ow (rate)
PERLA  ..pupils equal and reactive to light and 

accommodation

PET  ......positron emission tomography
PID  ......pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease
PIP .......proximal interphalangeal (joint)
PMH  .....past medical history
PND  .....paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
PO  ........per os (by mouth)
PPI .......proton pump inhibitor, eg omeprazole
PR  ........per rectum (by the rectum)

PRL  ......prolactin
PRN ......pro re nata (Latin for as required)
PRV  ......polycythaemia rubra vera
PSA  ......prostate-speciﬁ c antigen
PTH  ......parathyroid hormone
PTT  ......prothrombin time
PUO ......pyrexia of unknown origin
PV  ........per vaginam (by the vagina, eg pessary)
PVD ......peripheral vascular disease
QDS ......quater die sumendus; take 4 times daily
qqh  .....quarta quaque hora: take every 4h
R  ..........right
RA  ........rheumatoid arthritis
RAD  .....right axis deviation on the ECG
RBBB  ...right bundle branch block
RBC  ......red blood cell
RCT  ......randomized controlled trial
RDW  ....red cell distribution width
RFT  ......respiratory function tests
Rh ........Rhesus status
RIF  .......right iliac fossa
RRT  ......renal replacement therapy
RUQ  .....right upper quadrant
RV  ........right ventricle of heart
RVF  ......right ventricular failure
RVH ......right ventricular hypertrophy
  .........recipe (Latin for treat with)
s/sec  ...second(s)
S1, S2  ....ﬁ rst and second heart sounds
SBE  ......subacute bacterial endocarditis
SC  ........subcutaneous
SD  ........standard deviation
SE  ........side-eff ect(s)
SIADH  ..syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone 

secretion
SL  ........sublingual
SLE  ......systemic lupus erythematosus
SOB  ......short of breath
SOBOE  .short of breath on exertion
SpO2  ....peripheral oxygen saturation (%)
SR  ........slow-release
Stat  ....statim (immediately; as initial dose)
STD/I  ...sexually transmitted disease/infection
SVC  ......superior vena cava
SVT  ......supraventricular tachycardia
T°  .........temperature
t½  ........biological half-life
T3  ........tri-iodothyronine
T4  ........thyroxine
TB  ........tuberculosis
TDS  ......ter die sumendus (take 3 times a day)
TFT  ......thyroid function test (eg TSH)
TIA  ......transient ischaemic attack
TIBC  ....total iron-binding capacity
TPN  ......total parenteral nutrition
TPR  ......temperature, pulse, and respirations count
TRH  ......thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH  ......thyroid-stimulating hormone
TTP  ......thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
U  ..........units
UC  ........ulcerative colitis
U&E  .....urea and electrolytes and creatinine
UMN .....upper motor neuron
URT(I)  ..upper respiratory tract (infection)
US(S) ....ultrasound (scan)
UTI  ......urinary tract infection
VDRL  ....Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory
VE  ........ventricular extrasystole
VF  ........ventricular ﬁ brillation
VHF  ......viral haemorrahgic fever
VMA  ....vanillylmandelic acid (HMMA)
V/Q  .......ventilation/perfusion scan
VRE  ......vancomycin resistant enterococci
VSD  ......ventricular-septal defect
VT  ........ventricular tachycardia
VTE  ......venous thromboembolism
WBC  ....white blood cell
WCC  ....white blood cell count
wk(s)  ..week(s)
yr(s)  ...year(s)
ZN  ........Ziehl–Neelsen stain, eg for mycobacteria

_OHCM_10e.indb   vii

_OHCM_10e.indb   vii

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

_OHCM_10e.indb   viii

_OHCM_10e.indb   viii

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

‘He who studies medicine without books sails an unchartered sea, but he who 
studies medicine without patients does not go to sea at all’
William Osler 1849–1919

The word ‘patient’ occurs frequently throughout this book.
Do not skim over it lightly.
Rather pause and doff  your metaphorical cap, off ering due respect to those 
who by the opening up of their lives to you, become your true teachers.
Without your patients, you are a technician with a useless skill.
With them, you are a doctor.

_OHCM_10e.indb   ix

_OHCM_10e.indb   ix

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

1  Thinking about medicine

Contents
The Hippocratic oath  1
Medical care  2
Compassion  3
The diagnostic puzzle  4
Being wrong  5
Duty of candour  5
Bedside manner and communication 

skills  6

Prescribing drugs  8
Surviving life on the wards  10
Death  12
Medical ethics  14
Psychiatry on medical and surgical 

wards  15

The older person  16
The pregnant woman  17
Epidemiology  18
Randomized controlled trials  19
Medical mathematics  20
Evidence-based medicine (EBM)  22
Medicalization  23 

Fig 1.1  Asclepius, the god of healing and his three 
daughters,  Meditrina  (medicine),  Hygieia  (hy-
giene), and Panacea (healing). The staff  and single 
snake  of  Asclepius  should  not  be  confused  with 
the twin snakes and caduceus of Hermes, the dei-
ﬁ ed trickster and god of commerce, who is viewed 
with disdain. 
Plate from Aubin L Millin, Galerie Mythologique (1811)

We thank Dr Kate Mansﬁ eld, our Specialist Reader, for her contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   x

_OHCM_10e.indb   x

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

ability and judgement this oath and this covenant.

gods and goddesses, making them my witnesses, that I will fulﬁ l according to my 

The Hippocratic oath ~4th century BC
I swear by Apollo the physician and Asclepius and Hygieia and Panacea and all the 
T o hold him who has taught me this art as equal to my parents and to live my 

life in partnership with him, and if he is in need of money to give him a share of 
mine, and to regard his off spring as equal to my own brethren and to teach them 
this art, if they desire to learn it, without fee and covenant. I will impart it by pre-
cept, by lecture and by all other manner of teaching, not only to my own sons but 
also to the sons of him who has taught me, and to disciples bound by covenant and 
oath according to the law of physicians, but to none other.

my power and judgement, not for their injury or any wrongful purpose.

T he regimen I shall adopt shall be to the beneﬁ t of the patients to the best of 
I will not give a deadly drug to anyone though it be asked of me, nor will I lead 

the way in such counsel.1 And likewise I will not give a woman a pessary to pro-
cure abortion.2 But I will keep my life and my art in purity and holiness. I will not 
use the knife,3 not even, verily, on suff erers of stone but I will give place to such as 
are craftsmen therein.

or female, bond or free.

from all voluntary wrongdoing and corruption, especially seduction of male 

Whatsoever  house  I  enter,  I  will  enter  for  the  beneﬁ t  of  the  sick,  refraining 
Whatsoever  things  I  see  or  hear  concerning  the  life  of  men,  in  my  attend-

ance  on  the  sick,  or  even  apart  from  my  attendance,  which  ought  not  to 
be blabbed abroad, I will keep silence on them, counting such things to be as reli-
gious secrets.

1

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

If I fulﬁ l this oath and do not violate it, may it be granted to me to enjoy life and 

art alike, with good repute for all time to come; but may the contrary befall me 

if I transgress and violate my oath.

The endurance of the Hippocratic oath
Paternalistic, irrelevant, inadequate, and possibly plagiarized from the followers of 
Pythagoras of Samos; it is argued that the Hippocratic oath has failed to evolve 
into anything more than a right of passage for physicians. Is it adequate to address 
the scientiﬁ c, political, social, and economic realities that exist for doctors today? 
Certainly, medical training without a fee appears to have been conﬁ ned to history. 
Yet it remains one of the oldest binding documents in history and its principles of 
commitment, ethics, justice, professionalism, and conﬁ dentiality transcend time.

The absence of autonomy as a fundamental tenet of modern medical care can 
be debated. But just as anatomy and physiology have been added to the doctor’s 
repertoire since Hippocrates, omissions should not undermine the oath as a para-
digm of self-regulation amongst a group of specialists committed to an ideal. And 
do not forget that illness may represent a temporary loss of autonomy caused by 
fear, vulnerability, and a subjective weighting of present versus future. It could 
be argued that Hippocratic paternalism is, in fact, required to restore autonomy.
Contemporary versions of the oath often fail to make doctors accountable for 
keeping to any aspect of the pledge. And beware the oath that is nothing more 
than historic ritual without accountability, for then it can be superseded by per-
sonal, political, social, or economic priorities:

‘In Auschwitz, doctors presided over the murder of most of the one million 
victims…. [They] did not recall being especially aware in Auschwitz of their 
Hippocratic oath, and were not surprisingly, uncomfortable discussing it…The 
oath of loyalty to Hitler…was much more real to them.’

Robert Jay Lifton, The Nazi Doctors.

1  This is unlikely to be a commentary on euthanasia (easeful death) as the oath predates the word. Rather, 
it is believed to allude to the common practice of using doctors as political assassins.
2  Abortion by oral methods was legal in ancient Greece. The oath cautions only against the use of pessaries 
as a potential source of lethal infection.
3  The oath does not disavow surgery, merely asks the physician to cede to others with expertise.

_OHCM_10e.indb   1

_OHCM_10e.indb   1

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
2

Medical care

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Advice for doctors
  • Do not blame the sick for being sick.
  • Seek to discover your patient’s wishes and comply with them.
  • Learn.
  • Work for your patients, not your consultant.
  • Respect opinions.
  • Treat a patient, not a disease.
  • Admit a person, not a diagnosis.
  • Spend time with the bereaved; help them to shed tears.
  • Give the patient (and yourself) time: for questions, to reﬂ ect, and to allow healing.
  • Give patients the beneﬁ t of the doubt.
  • Be optimistic.
  • Be kind to yourself: you are not an inexhaustible resource.
  • Question your conscience.
  • Tell the truth.
  • Recognize that the scientiﬁ c approach may be ﬁ nite, but experience and empathy 

are limitless.

Medicine and the stars
Decision  and  intervention  are  the  essence  of  action, 
reﬂ ection and conjecture are the essence of thought; 
the essence of medicine is combining these in the ser-
vice of others. We off er our ideals to stimulate thought 
and action: like the stars, ideals are hard to reach, but 
they are used for navigation. Orion (ﬁ g 1.2) is our star 
of choice. His constellation is visible across the globe 
so he links our readers everywhere, and he will remain 
recognizable  long  after  other  constellations  have  dis-
torted.

Fig  1.2  The  const ellation  of  Orion  has  three  superb  stars:  Bel-
latrix (the stetho scope’s bell), Betel  geuse (B), and Rigel (R). The 
three stars at the cross over (Orion’s Belt) are Alnitak, Alnilam, and 
Mint a ka.

©JML and David Malin.

The National Health Service

‘The resources of medical skill and the apparatus of healing shall be placed at 
the disposal of the patient, without charge, when he or she needs them; that 
medical  treatment  and  care  should  be  a  communal  responsibility,  that  they 
should be made available to rich and poor alike in accordance with medical need 
and by no other criteria...Society becomes more wholesome, more serene, and 
spiritually healthier, if it knows that its citizens have at the back of their con-
sciousness the knowledge that not only themselves, but all their fellows, have ac-
cess, when ill, to the best that medical skill can provide...You can always ‘pass by 
on the other side’. That may be sound economics. It could not be worse morals.’
Aneurin Bevan, In Place of Fear, 1952.
In 2014, the Commonwealth Fund presented an overview of international healthcare 
systems examining ﬁ nancing, governance, healthcare quality, effi  ciency, evidence-
based practice, and innovation. In a scoring system of 11 nations across 11 catego-
ries, the NHS came ﬁ rst overall, at less than half the cost per head spent in the USA.1 
The King’s Fund debunks the myth that the NHS is unaff ordable in the modern era,2 
although funding remains a political choice. Bevan prophesied, ‘The NHS will last as 
long as there are folk left with the faith to ﬁ ght for it.’ Guard it well.

_OHCM_10e.indb   2

_OHCM_10e.indb   2

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
QALYS and resource rationing

‘There is a good deal of hit and miss about general medicine. It is a profession 
where exact measurement is not easy and the absence of it opens the mind to 
endless conjecture as to the efﬁ cacy of this or that form of treatment.’

3

Aneurin Bevan, In Place of Fear, 1952.
A QALY is a quality-adjusted life year. One year of healthy life expectancy = 1 QALY, 
whereas 1 year of unhealthy life expectancy is worth <1 QALY, the precise value falling 
with progressively worsening quality of life. If an intervention means that you are 
likely to live for 8 years in perfect health then that intervention would have a QALY 
value of 8. If a new drug improves your quality of life from 0.5 to 0.7 for 25 years, 
then it has a QALY value of (0.7 Ω 0.5)≈25=5. Based on the price of the intervention, the 
cost of 1 QALY can be calculated. Healthcare priorities can then be weighted towards 
low cost QALYs. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) consid-
ers that interventions for which 1 QALY=<£30 000 are cost-eff ective. However, as a 
practical application of utilitarian theory, QALYs remain open to criticism (table 1.1). 
Remember that although for a clinician, time is unambiguous and quantiﬁ able, time 
experienced by patients is more like literature than science: a minute might be a 
chapter, a year a single sentence.3
Table 1.1  The advantages and disadvantages of QALYs
Advantages
Transparent societal decision 
making
Common unit for diff erent 
interventions 
Allows cost-eff ectiveness 
analysis
Allows international comparison Potentially ageist—the elderly always have less ‘life 

Based on a value judgement that living longer is a 
measure of success
Quality of life assessment comes from general public, 
not those with disease

Disadvantages
Focuses on slice (disease), not pie (health)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

expectancy’ to gain
Focus on outcomes, not process ie care, compassion

The inverse care law, equity, and distributive justice:
The inverse care law states that the availability of good medical care varies inversely 
with the need for it. This arises due to poorer quality services, barriers to service ac-
cess, and external disadvantage. By focusing on the beneﬁ t gained from an interven-
tion, the QALY system treats everyone as equal. But is this really equality? Distributive 
justice is the distribution of ‘goods’ so that those who are worst off  become better 
off . In healthcare terms, this means allocation of resources to those in greatest need, 
regardless of QALYs.

Compassion
The importance of compassion4,5 in medicine is undisputed. It is an emotional re-
sponse to negativity or suff ering that motivates a desire to help. It is more than 
‘pity’, which has connotations of inferiority; and diff erent from ‘empathy’, which is 
a vicarious experience of the emotional state of another. It requires imaginative 
indwelling into another’s condition. The ﬁ ctional Jules Henri experiences a loss of 
sense of the second person; another person’s despair alters his perception of the 
world so that they are ‘connected in some universal, though unseen, pattern of 
humanity’.4 With compassion, the pain of another is ‘intensiﬁ ed by the imagina-
tion and prolonged by a hundred echoes’.5 Compassion cannot be taught; it re-
quires engagement with suff ering, cultural understanding, and a mutuality, rather 
than paternalism. Adverse political, excessively mechanical, and managerial envi-
ronments discourage its expression. When compassion (what is felt) is diffi  cult, 
etiquette (what is done) must not fail: reﬂ ection, empathy, respectfulness, atten-
tion, and manners count: ‘For I could never even have prayed for this: that you 
would have pity on me and endure my agonies and stay with me and help me’.6

4  Sebastian Faulkes, Human Traces, 2005.
5  Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984.
6  Philoctetes by Sophocles 409 BC (translation Phillips and Clay, 2003).

_OHCM_10e.indb   3

_OHCM_10e.indb   3

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
4

The diagnostic puzzle

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

How to formulate a diagnosis
Diagnosing by recognition: For students, this is the most irritating method. You 
spend an hour asking all the wrong questions, and in waltzes a doctor who names 
the disease before you have even ﬁ nished taking the pulse. This doctor has simply 
recognized the illness like he recognizes an old friend (or enemy).
Diagnosing by probability: Over our clinical lives we build up a personal database 
of diagnoses and associated pitfalls. We unconsciously run each new ‘case’ through 
this continuously developing probabilistic algorithm with increasing speed and ef-
fortlessness.
Diagnosing by reasoning: Like Sherlock Holmes, we must exclude each diff erential, 
and the diagnosis is what remains. This is dependent on the quality of the diff erential 
and presupposes methods for absolutely excluding diseases. All tests are statistical 
rather than absolute (5% of the population lie outside the ‘normal’ range), which is 
why this method remains, like Sherlock Holmes, ﬁ ctional at best.
Diagnosing by watching and waiting: The dangers and expense of exhaustive tests 
may be obviated by the skilful use of time.
Diagnosing by selective doubting: Diagnosis relies on clinical signs and investiga-
tive tests. Yet there are no hard signs or perfect tests. When diagnosis is diffi  cult, try 
doubting the signs, then doubting the tests. But the game of medicine is unplayable 
if you doubt everything: so doubt selectively.
Diagnosis by iteration and reiteration: A brief history suggests looking for a few 
signs, which leads to further questions and a few tests. As the process reiterates, 
various  diagnostic  possibilities  crop  up,  leading  to  further  questions  and  further 
tests. And so history taking and diagnosing never end.

A razor, a dictum, and a bludgeon
Consider three wise men:6
Occam’s razor: Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem translates as 
‘entities must not be multiplied unnecessarily’. The physician should therefore seek 
to achieve diagnostic parsimony and ﬁ nd a single disease to explain all symptoms, 
rather than proff er two or three unrelated diagnoses.
Hickam’s  dictum:  Patients  can  have  as  many  diagnoses  as  they  damn  well 
please. Signs and symptoms may be due to more than one pathology. Indeed, a 
patient is statistically more likely to have two common diagnoses than one unify-
ing rare condition.
Crabtree’s bludgeon: No set of mutually inconsistent observations can exist for 
which some human intellect cannot conceive a coherent explanation however 
complicated. This acts as a reminder that physicians prefer Occam to Hickam: a 
unifying diagnosis is a much more pleasing thing. Conﬁ rmation bias then ensues 
as we look for supporting information to ﬁ t with our unifying theory. Remember 
to test the validity of your diagnosis, no matter how pleasing it may seem. 

Heuristic pitfalls
Heuristics are the cognitive shortcuts which allow quick decision-making by focus-
ing on relevant predictors. Be aware of them so you can be vigilant of their traps.7
Representativeness:  Diagnosis  is  driven  by  the  ‘classic  case’.  Do  not  forget  the 
atypical variant.
Availability: The diseases that we remember, or treated most recently, carry more 
weight  in  our  diagnostic  hierarchy.  Question  whether  this  more  readily  available 
information is truly relevant.
Overconﬁ dence: Are you overestimating how much you know and how well you 
know it? Probably.
Bias: The hunt for, and recall of, clinical information that ﬁ ts with our expectations. 
Can you disprove your own diagnostic hypothesis?
Illusory correlation: Associated events are presumed to be causal. But was it treat-
ment or time that cured the patient?

_OHCM_10e.indb   4

_OHCM_10e.indb   4

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
5

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Being wrong
It is always possible to be wrong8 because you remain unaware of it while it is 
happening. Such error-blindness is why ‘I am wrong’ is a statement of impos-
sibility. Once you are aware that you are wrong, you are no longer wrong, and can 
therefore only declare ‘I was wrong’. It is also the reason that fallibility must be 
accepted as a universally human phenomenon. Conversely, certainty is the convic-
tion that we cannot be wrong because our biases and beliefs must be grounded 
in fact. Certainty produces the comforting illusion that the world (and medicine) 
is  knowable.  But  be  cautious  of  certainty  for  it  involves  a  shift  in  perspective 
inwards, towards our own convictions. This means that other people’s stories can 
cease to matter to us. Certainty becomes lethal to empathy.

In order to determine how and why mistakes are made, error must be acknowl-
edged and accepted. Defensiveness is bad for progress. ‘I was wrong, but...’ is 
rarely an open and honest analysis of error that will facilitate diff erent and better 
action in the future. It is only with close scrutiny of mistakes that you can see the 
possibility of change at the core of error. And yet, medical practice is littered with 
examples of resistance to disclosure, and reward for the concealment of error. 
This must change.4 Remember error blindness and protect your whistle-blowers. 
Listen. It is an act of humility that acknowledges the position of others, and the 
possibility of error in yourself. Knowledge persists only until it can be disproved. 
Better to aspire to the aporia of Socrates:

‘At ﬁ rst, he didn’t know...just as he doesn’t yet know the answer now either; 
but he still thought he knew the answer then, and he was answering con-
ﬁ dently, as if he had knowledge. He didn’t think he was stuck before, but 
now he appreciates that he is stuck...At any rate, it would seem that we’ve 
increased his chances of ﬁ nding out the truth of the matter, because now, 
given his lack of knowledge, he’ll be glad to undertake the investigation...Do 
you think he’d have tried to enquire or learn about this matter when he thought 
he knew it (even though he didn’t), until he’d become bogged down and stuck, 
and had come to appreciate his ignorance and to long for knowledge?’

Plato: Meno and other dialogues, 402 BC; Waterﬁ eld translation, 2005.

Medicine, error, and the humanities
Error provides a link between medicine and the humanities. Both strive to bridge 
the gap between ourselves and the world. Medicine attempts to do this in an ob-
jective manner, using disproved hypotheses (error) to progress towards a ‘truth’. 
Art, however, accepts the unknown, and celebrates transience and subjectivity. 
By seeing the world through someone else’s eyes, art teaches us empathy. It is at 
the point where art and medicine collide that doctors can re-attach themselves 
to the human race and feel those emotions that motivate or terrify our patients. 
‘Unknowing’ drives medical theory, but also stories and pictures. And these are the 
hallmark of our highest endeavours.

‘We all know that Art is not truth. Art is a lie that makes us realise the truth, 
at least the truth that is given to us to understand.’

Pablo Picasso in Picasso Speaks, 1923.

Duty of candour
In a world in which a ‘mistake’ can be redeﬁ ned as a ‘complication’, it is easy to 
conceal error behind a veil of technical language. In 2014, a professional duty of 
candour became statutory in England for incidents that cause death, severe or 
moderate harm, or prolonged psychological harm. As soon as practicable, the pa-
tient must be told in person what happened, given details of further enquiries, and 
off ered an apology. But this should not lead to the proff ering of a ‘tick-box’ apology 
of questionable value. Be reassured that an apology is not an admission of liability. 
Risks and imperfections are inherent to medicine and you have the freedom to 
be sorry whenever they occur. Focus not on legislation, but on transparency and 
learning. The ethics of forgiveness require a complete response in which the pa-
tient’s voice is placed at the heart of the process.9

_OHCM_10e.indb   5

_OHCM_10e.indb   5

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
6

Bedside manner and communication skills

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

A good bedside manner is dynamic. It develops in the light of a patient's needs and is 
grounded in honesty, humour, and humility, in the presence of human weakness. But 
it is fragile: `It is unsettling to ﬁ nd how little it takes to defeat success in medicine... 
You do not imagine that a mere matter of etiquette could foil you. But the social 
dimension turns out to be as essential as the scientiﬁ c... How each interaction is 
negotiated can determine whether a doctor is trusted, whether a patient is heard, 
whether the right diagnosis is made, the right treatment given. But in this realm 
there are no perfect formulas.' (Atul Gawande, Better: A Surgeon's Notes on Performance, 2008)
A patient may not care how much you know, until they know how much you care. 
Without care and trust, there can be little healing. Pre-set formulas off er, at best, 
a guide:
Introduce yourself every time you see a patient, giving your name and your role.

‘Introductions are about making a human connection between one human being 
who is suffering and vulnerable, and another human being who wishes to help. 
They begin therapeutic relationships and can instantly build trust’

Kate Granger, hellomynameis.org.uk, #hellomynameis
Be friendly. Smile. Sit down. Take an interest in the patient and ask an unscripted 
question. Use the patient’s name more than once.
Listen. Do not be the average physician who interrupts after 20–30 seconds.

‘Look wise, say nothing, and grunt. Speech was given to conceal thought.’

William Osler (1849–1919).
Increase the wait-time between listening and speaking. The patient may say more.
Pay attention to the non-verbal. Observe gestures, body language, and eye contact. 
Be aware of your own.
Explain. Consider written or drawn explanations. When appropriate, include rela-
tives in discussions to assist in understanding and recall.
Adapt your language. An explanation in ﬂ uent medicalese may mean nothing to 
your patient.
Clarify understanding. ‘Acute’, ‘chronic’, ‘dizzy’, ‘jaundice’, ‘shock’, ‘malignant’, ‘re-
mission’: do these words have the same meaning for both you and your patient?
Be polite. It requires no talent.

‘Politeness is prudence and consequently rudeness is folly. To make enemies by 
being...unnecessarily rude is as crazy as setting one’s house on ﬁ re.’

Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860).
Address silent fears. Give patients a chance to raise their concerns: ‘What are you 
worried this might be?’, ‘Some people worry about...., does that worry you?’
Consider the patient’s disease model. Patients may have their own explanations 
for their symptoms. Acknowledge their theories and, if appropriate, make an eff ort 
to explain why you think them unlikely.

‘A physician is obligated to consider more than a diseased organ, more even than 
the whole man - he must view the man in his world.’

Harvey Cushing (1869–1939).
Keep the patient informed. Explain your working diagnosis and relate this to their 
understanding, beliefs, and concerns. Let them know what will happen next, and the 
likely timing. ‘Soon’ may mean a month to a doctor, but a day to a patient. Apologize 
for any delay.
Summarize. Is there anything you have missed?
Communication, partnership, and health promotion are improved when doctors are 
trained to KEPe Warm:10
  • Knowing—the patient’s history, social talk.
  • Encouraging—back-channelling (hmmm, aahh).
  • Physically engaging—hand gestures, appropriate contact, lean in to the patient.
  • Warm  up—cooler,  professional  but  supportive  at  the  start  of  the  consultation, 
making sure to avoid dominance, patronizing, and non-verbal cut-off s (ie turning 
away from the patient) at the end.

_OHCM_10e.indb   6

_OHCM_10e.indb   6

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
7

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Asking questions
Open  questions  ‘How  are  you?’,  ‘How  does  it  feel?’  The  direction  a  patient 
chooses  off ers  valuable  information.  ‘Tell  me  about  the  vomit.’  ‘It  was  dark.’ 
‘How  dark?’  ‘Dark  bits  in  it.’  ‘Like…?’  ‘Like  bits  of  soil  in  it.’  This  information  is 
gold, although it is not cast in the form of coff ee grounds.
Patient-centred  questions  Patients  may  have  their  own  ideas  about  what 
is causing their symptoms, how they impact, and what should be done. This is 
ever truer as patients frequently consult Dr Google before their GP. Unless their 
ideas,  concerns,  and  expectations  are  elucidated,  your  patient  may  never  be 
fully satisﬁ ed with you, or able to be fully involved in their own care.
Considering  the  whole  Humans  are  not  self-suffi  cient  units;  we  are  complex 
relational  beings,  constantly  reacting  to  events,  environments,  and  each  other. 
To  understand  your  patient’s  concerns  you  must  understand  their  context: 
home-life, work, dreams, fears. Information from family and friends can be very 
helpful for identifying triggering and exacerbating factors, and elucidating the 
true underlying cause. A headache caused by anxiety is best treated not with 
analgesics, but by helping the patient access support.
Silence  and  echoes  Often  the  most  valuable  details  are  the  most  diffi  cult  to 
verbalize. Help your patients express such thoughts by giving them time: if you 
interrogate a robin, he will ﬂ y away; treelike silence may bring him to your hand.
‘Trade Secret: the best diagnosticians in medicine are not internists, but pa-
tients. If only the doctor would sit down, shut up, and listen, the patient will 
eventually tell him the diagnosis.’

Oscar London, Kill as Few Patients as Possible, 1987.
Whilst  powerful,  silence  should  not  be  oppressive—try  echoing  the  last  words 
said to encourage your patient to continue vocalizing a particular thought.
Try to avoid
Closed questions: These permit no opportunity to deny assumptions. ‘Have you 
had  hip  pain  since  your  fall?’  ‘Yes,  doctor.’  Investigations  are  requested  even 
though the same hip pain was also present for many years before the fall!
Questions suggesting the answer: ‘Was the vomit black—like coff ee grounds?’ 
‘Yes, like coff ee grounds, doctor.’ The doctor’s expectations and hurry to get the 
evidence  into  a  pre-decided  format  have  so  tarnished  the  story  as  to  make  it 
useless.

Shared decision-making: no decision about me, without me
Shared decision-making aims to place patients’ needs, wishes, and preferences at 
the centre of clinical decision-making.
  • Support patients to articulate their understanding of their condition.
  • Inform patients about their condition, treatment options, beneﬁ ts, and risk.
  • Make decisions based on mutual understanding.
Consider asking not, ‘What is the matter?’ but, ‘What matters to you?’.
Consider also your tendency towards libertarian paternalism or ‘nudge’. This is when 
information is given in such a way as to encourage individuals to make a particular 
choice that is felt to be in their best interests, and to correct apparent ‘reasoning 
failure’ in the patient. This is done by framing the information in either a positive or 
negative light depending on your view and how you might wish to sway your audi-
ence. Consider the following statements made about a new drug which off ers 96% 
survival compared to 94% with an older drug:
  • More people survive if they take this drug.
  • This new drug reduces mortality by a third.
  • This new drug beneﬁ ts only 2% of patients.
  • There may be unknown side-eff ects to the new drug.
How do you choose?

_OHCM_10e.indb   7

_OHCM_10e.indb   7

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
8

Prescribing drugs

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Consult the BNF or BNF for Children or similar before giving any drug with which 
you are not thoroughly familiar.
Check the patient’s allergy status and make all reasonable attempts to qualify the 
reaction (table 1.2). The burden of iatrogenic hospital admission and avoidable drug-
related deaths is real. Equally, do not deny life-saving treatment based on a mild and 
predictable reaction.
Check drug interactions meticulously.
Table 1.2  Drug reactions
Type of reaction
True allergy
Side-eff ect

Examples
Anaphylaxis: oedema, urticaria, wheeze (p794–5)
All medications have side-eff ects. The most common are rash, 
itch, nausea, diarrhoea, lethargy, and headache
Due to inter-individual variance. Dosage regimen normally cor-
rects for this but beware states of altered drug clearance such 
as liver and renal (p305) impairment
Reaction due to drugs used in combination, eg azathioprine and 
allopurinol, erythromycin and warfarin
Remember primum non nocere: ﬁ rst do no harm. The more minor the illness, the 
more weight this carries. Overall, doctors have a tendency to prescribe too much 
rather than too little.

Increased eff ect/
toxicity

Drug interaction

Consider the following when prescribing any medication:
1      The underlying  pathology.  Do  not  let  the  amelioration  of  symptoms  lead  to 

failure of investigation and diagnosis.

2      Is this prescription according to best evidence?
3      Drug reactions. All medications come with risks, potential side-eff ects, incon-

venience to the patient, and expense.
4      Is the patient taking other medications?
5      Alternatives to medication. Does the patient really need or want medication? 
Are you giving medication out of a sense of needing to do something, or because 
you genuinely feel it will help the patient? Is it more appropriate to off er infor-
mation, reassurance, or lifestyle modiﬁ cation?

6      Is there a risk of overdose or addiction?
7      Can you assist the patient? Once per day is better than four times. How easy is it 
to open the bottle? Is there an intervention that can help with medicine manage-
ment, eg a multi-compartment compliance aid, patient counselling, an IT solution 
such as a smartphone app?

8      Future  planning.  How  are  you  going  to  decide  whether  the  medication  has 
worked? What are the indications to continue, stop, or change the prescribed 
regimen?

In appreciation of pain
Pain  is  often  seen  as  an  unequivocally  bad  thing,  and  certainly  many  patients 
dream of a life without pain. However, without pain we are vulnerable to ourselves 
and our behaviours, and risk ignorance of underlying conditions.

While most children quickly learn not to touch boiling water as their own body 
disciplines their behaviour with the punishment of pain; children born with con-
genital insensitivity to pain (CIPA) can burn themselves, break bones, and tear skin 
without feeling any immediate ill eff ect. Their health is constantly at risk from 
unconsciously self-mutilating behaviours and unnoticed trauma. CIPA is very rare 
but examples of the human tendency for self-damage without the protective fac-
tor of pain are common. Have you ever bitten your tongue or cheek after a dental 
anaesthetic? Patients with diabetic neuropathy risk osteomyelitis and arthropa-
thy in their pain-free feet.

If you receive a message of bad news, you do not solve the problem by hiding the 

message. Listen to the pain as well as making the patient comfortable.

_OHCM_10e.indb   8

_OHCM_10e.indb   8

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
9

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Compliance and concordance 
Compliance embodies the imbalance of power between doctor and patient: the 
doctor knows best and the patient’s only responsibility is to comply with that 
monopoly of medical knowledge. Devaluing of patients and ethically dubious, the 
term  ‘compliance’  has  been  relegated  from  modern  prescribing  practice.  Con-
cordance is now king: a prescribing agreement that incorporates the beliefs and 
wishes of the patient.

Only 50–70% of patients take medicines as prescribed to them. This leads to 
concern over wasted resources and avoidable illness. Interventions that increase 
concordance are promoted using the mnemonic: Educating Patients Enhances 
Care Received
  • Explanation: discuss the beneﬁ ts and risks of taking and not-taking medication. 
Some patients will prefer not to be treated and, if the patient has capacity and 
understands the risks, such a decision should be respected.

  • Problems: talk through the patient’s experience of their treatment—have they 

suff ered side-eff ects which have prompted non-concordance?

  • Expectations: discuss what they should expect from their treatment. This is im-
portant especially in the treatment of silent conditions where there is no symp-
tomatic beneﬁ t, eg antihypertensive treatment.

  • Capability: talk through the medication regimen with them and consider ways 

to reduce its complexity.

  • Reinforcement: reproduce your discussion in written form for the patient to take 
home. Check how they are managing their medications when you next see them.
But remember that there is little evidence that increasing information improves 
concordance. And if concordance is increased solely by the ‘education’ of the pa-
tient then it starts to look a lot like compliance.11 A truly shared agreement will 
not always ‘comply’ or ‘concord’ with the prescriber. The capacity of the informed 
individual to consent or not, means that in some cases, concordance looks more 
like informed divergence.

The placebo eff  ect
The placebo eff ect is a well-recognized phenomenon whereby patients improve af-
ter undergoing therapy that is believed by clinicians to have no direct eff ect on the 
pathophysiology of their disease. The nature of the therapy (pills, rituals, massages) 
matters less than whether the patient believes the therapy will help.

Examples of the placebo eff ect in modern medicine include participants in the pla-
cebo arm of a clinical trial who see dramatic improvements in their refractory illness, 
and patients in severe pain who assume the saline ﬂ ush prior to their IV morphine 
is opioid and reporting relief of pain before the morphine has been administered. It 
is likely that much of the symptomatic relief experienced from ‘active’ medicines in 
fact results from a placebo eff ect.

The complementary therapy industry has many ingenious ways of utilizing the 
placebo eff ect. These can give great beneﬁ ts to patients, often with minimal risk; but 
there remains the potential for signiﬁ cant harm, both ﬁ nancially and by dissuading 
patients from seeking necessary medical help.

Why evolution has given us bodies with a degree of self-healing ability in response 
to a belief that healing will happen, and not in response to a desire for healing, is 
unclear. Perhaps the belief that a solution is underway ‘snoozes’ the internal alarm 
systems that are designed to tell us there is a problem, and so improve the symptoms 
that result from the body’s perception of harm.

Many patients who receive therapies are unaware of their intended eff ects, thus 
missing out on the narrative that may give them an expectation of improvement. Try 
to ﬁ nd time to discuss with your patients the story of how you hope treatment will 
address their problems.

_OHCM_10e.indb   9

_OHCM_10e.indb   9

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
10

Surviving life on the wards

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

The ward round
  • All entries on the patient record must have: date, time, the name of the clinician 
leading the interaction, the clinical ﬁ ndings and plan, your signature, printed name, 
and contact details. Make sure the patient details are at the top of every side of 
paper. Write legibly—this may save more than the patient.

  • A problem list will help you structure your thoughts and guide others.
  • BODEX: Blood results, Observations, Drug chart, ECG, X-rays. Look at these. If you 
think there is something of concern, make sure someone else looks at them too.

  • Document what information has been given to the patient and relatives.
Handover
  • Make sure you know when and where to attend.
  • Make sure you understand what you need to do and why. ‘Check blood results’ or 
‘Review warning score’ is not enough. Better to: ‘Check potassium in 4 hours and 
discuss with a senior if it remains >6.0mmol/L’ .

On call
  • Write it down.
  • The ABCDE approach (p779) to a sick patient is never wrong.
  • Try and establish the clinical context of tasks you are asked to do. Prioritize and let 

staff  know when you are likely to get to them.

  • Learn the national early warning score (NEWS) (p892, ﬁ g A1).
  • Smile, even when talking by phone. Be polite.
  • Eat and drink, preferably with your team.
Making a referral
  • Have the clinical notes, observation chart, drug chart, and investigation results to 

hand. Read them before you call.

  • Use SBAR: Situtation (who you are, who the patient is, the reason for the call), 

Background, Assessment of the patient now, Request.

  • Anticipate: urine dip for the nephrologist, PR exam for the gastroenterologist.

Living with blood spattered armour
With the going down of the sun we can momentarily cheer ourselves up by the 
thought that we are one day nearer to the end of life on earth—and our respon-
sibility for the unending tide of illness that ﬂ oods into our corridors, and seeps 
into our wards and consulting rooms. Of course you may have many other quiet 
satisfactions, but if not, read on and wink with us as we hear some fool telling us 
that our aim should be to produce the greatest health and happiness for the great-
est number. When we hear this, we don’t expect cheering from the tattered ranks 
of on-call doctors; rather, our ears detect a decimated groan, because these men 
and women know that there is something at stake in on-call doctoring far more 
elemental than health or happiness: namely survival.

Within  the  ﬁ rst  weeks,  however  brightly  your  armour  shone,  it  will  now  be 
smeared and spattered, if not with blood, then with the fallout from the many 
decisions that were taken without suffi  cient care and attention. Force majeure on 
the part of Nature and the exigencies of ward life have, we are suddenly stunned 
to realize, taught us to be second-rate; for to insist on being ﬁ rst-rate in all areas 
is to sign a death warrant for ourselves and our patients. Don’t keep re-polishing 
your armour, for perfectionism does not survive untarnished in our clinical world. 
Rather, to ﬂ ourish, furnish your mind and nourish your body. Regular food makes 
midnight groans less intrusive. Drink plenty: doctors are more likely to be oliguric 
than their patients. And do not voluntarily deny yourself the restorative power of 
sleep, for it is our natural state, in which we were ﬁ rst created, and we only wake 
to feed our dreams.

We cannot prepare you for ﬁ nding out that you are not at ease with the person 
you are becoming, and neither would we dream of imposing a speciﬁ c regimen of 
exercise, diet, and mental ﬁ tness. Finding out what can lead you through adversity 
is the art of living.

_OHCM_10e.indb   10

_OHCM_10e.indb   10

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
On being busy: Corrigan’s secret door
Dr Corrigan of Dublin was:

11

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

‘tall, erect, of commanding ﬁ gure...He had the countenance of an intellectual...
and  his  face  “beamed  with  kindness”...In  temperament  his  distinguishing 
traits were kindness and tenderness towards the sick, and the ability to make 
a bold decision.’

E. O’Brien, Conscience and Conﬂ ict: A Biography of Sir Dominic Corrigan 1802–1880, 1983
Was he busy? At the start of his professional life he was advised that the best way 
to get business was to pretend to have it. It was suggested that a note marked ‘Im-
mediate and pressing’ should be ostentatiously handed to him at the dinner table, 
but always at a suitable time so as not to miss the best food. Such advice was not 
taken. Corrigan aspired to hard work and taught his students the value of ‘never 
doing nothing’. The city in which he practised had a ‘degree of ﬁ lth, stench and dark-
ness, inconceivable by those who have not experienced them’, and ‘not enough hos-
pital beds to care for the great numbers in need.’ And so the story of a secret door, 
made in his consulting room, to escape the ever growing queue of eager patients.

In times of chaos, ﬁ lled with competing, urgent, simultaneous demands, excessive 
paperwork, too few beds, eff ort–reward imbalance, personal sacriﬁ ce, and despair; 
we all need Corrigan to take us by the shadow of our hand, and walk with us through 
a secret door into a calm inner world. Our metaphorical door has ﬁ ve parts:

1      However lonely you feel, you are not usually alone. Do not pride yourself on not 

asking for help. If a decision is a hard one, share it with a colleague.

2      Take any chance you get to sit down and rest. Have a cup of tea with other 
members of staff , or with a friendly patient (patients are sources of renewal, 
not just devourers of your energies).

3      Do not miss meals. If there is no time to go to the canteen, ensure that food is 
put aside for you to eat when you can: hard work and sleeplessness are twice 
as bad when you are hungry.

4      Avoid making work for yourself. It is too easy for doctors, trapped in their 
image of excessive work, and blackmailed by misplaced guilt, to remain on the 
wards re-clerking patients, re-writing notes, or re-checking results at an hour 
when the priority should be caring for themselves.

5      Look to the future. Plan for a good time after a bad rota.

The origins of the story of Corrigan’s secret door are unknown. It may never have 
existed other than in these hallowed pages. But when the legend becomes fact, 
print the legend.7

Resilience and coping
‘Burnout’ is common in clinical medicine. It is a syndrome of lost enthusiasm, re-
duced empathy, increased cynicism, and a decrease in the meaningfulness of work. 
Coping styles and resilience can protect doctors and better equip them to meet, and 
learn from, the challenges of clinical practice:12
  • Self-directedness correlates strongly with resilience. A personal sense of responsi-

bility allows learning from mistakes and moving on.

  • Cooperativeness is the ability to work with opinions and behaviours diff erent to 

your own, preventing them becoming a source of stress.

  • Clinicians who are low in harm avoidance are better able to accept uncertainty and 
a degree of risk. This facilitates decision-making as it is unclouded by anxiety and 
pessimism about potential problems. Supervised experience outside your comfort 
zone may help you deal better with uncertainty.

  • Be persistent but set realistic goals. Perfectionism can be detrimental.
  • Task-orientated coping occurs when a situation is seen as changeable. This is as-
sociated with less burnout than emotion-orientated coping when situations are 
considered unchangeable: don’t just do something, stand there.

  • Be self-aware. Development or modiﬁ cation of your personality traits may reduce 

your vulnerability.

7  The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance, 1962: Ransom Stoddard (Jimmy Stewart) becomes a legend after 
killing Liberty Valance in a duel. It does not matter that the real shooter was Tom Doniphon (John Wayne) 
all along.

_OHCM_10e.indb   11

_OHCM_10e.indb   11

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
12

Death

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

The wisdom of death
Death is nature’s cruel master stroke, allowing genotypes space to try new pheno-
types. The time comes in the life of every organism when it is better to start from 
scratch, rather than carry on with the weight and muddle of endless accretions. 
Our bodies and minds are the perishable phenotypes on the wave of our genes. But 
our genes are not really our genes. It is we who belong to them for a few decades. 
And death is nature’s great insult, that she should prefer to put all her eggs in the 
basket of a defenceless, incompetent neonate; rather than in the tried and tested 
custody of our own superb minds. But as our neuroﬁ brils begin to tangle, and that 
neonate walks to a wisdom that eludes us, we are forced to give nature credit for 
her daring idea. Of course, nature, in her careless way, can get it wrong: people 
often die in the wrong order and one of our chief roles is to prevent this misorder-
ing of deaths, not the phenomenon of death itself. With that exception, we must 
admit that dying is a brilliant idea, and one that it is most unlikely we would ever 
have devised ourselves.

Diagnosing dying
Would you be surprised if your patient were to die in the next few days, weeks, or 
months? If the answer is ‘no’ then end-of-life choices, decisions, and care should be 
addressed.

Consider: decline in functional performance, eg in bed or chair >50% of day, in-
creasing dependence, weight of co-morbidity, unstable or deteriorating symptom 
burden, decreased treatment response, weight loss >10% in 6 months, crisis admis-
sions, serum albumin <25g/L, sentinel event, eg fall, transfer to nursing home.

Diagnosing death
Death13 is the irreversible loss of the essential characteristics which are necessary 
for the existence of a human being.
Death following cessation of cardiorespiratory function:
Simultaneous and irreversible onset of apnoea, absence of circulation, and un-
consciousness.
Cardiorespiratory arrest is conﬁ rmed by observation of the following:
  • Absence of central pulse on palpation.
  • Absence of heart sounds on auscultation.
  • After 5 minutes of cardiorespiratory arrest absence of brainstem activity is con-
ﬁ rmed by the absence of pupillary responses to light, an absent corneal reﬂ ex, 
and no motor response to supra-orbital pressure.

The time of death is the time at which these criteria are fulﬁ lled.
Brainstem death:
Brainstem pathology causing irreversible damage to its integrative functions 
including neural control of cardiorespiratory function and consciousness.
Diagnosed by an absence of brainstem reﬂ exes:
  • No pupil light response.
  • No corneal reﬂ ex (blink to touch).
  • Absent oculovestibular reﬂ exes (no eye movements seen with injection of ice-
cold water into each external auditory meatus, tympanic membranes visualized).
  • No motor response to stimulation within the cranial nerve distribution (supra-

orbital pressure).
  • No cough/gag reﬂ ex.
  • No respiratory response to hypercarbia: oxgenation is maintained (SpO2>85%) 
but ventilation is reduced to achieve PaCO2 ≥6.0kPa with pH ≤7.40. No respiratory 
response is seen within 5 minutes and PaCO2 rises by >0.5kPa.

Diagnosis is made by two competent doctors registered for >5 years testing to-
gether completely and successfully on two separate occasions. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   12

_OHCM_10e.indb   12

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
13

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Managing death
Death may be regarded as a medical failure rather than an inevitable consequence 
of life. But when medical treatments can no longer off er a cure, and a patient enters 
the end of life, active management of death is vital. Remember that the focus of 
medicine is narrow and concerned more with the repair of health, rather than the 
sustenance of the soul. This medical imperative may fail in its duty to make life-in-
death better. Priorities at the end of life include freedom from pain, achieving a sense 
of completeness, being treated as a whole person, and ﬁ nding peace with God.14

Swift death due to a catastrophic event is rare. Most death is the end product of 
a struggle with long-term, progressive disease: cancer, COPD, vascular disease, neu-
rological deterioration, frailty, or dementia. Although death is inevitable, prognos-
tication is diffi  cult and inaccurate with remarkable variation in time to death. The 
patient in front of you may be the median, mean, or on the 99th centile. Dare to hope, 
but prepare for the worst. Prioritize preferences and aim to meet individual needs.15
  • Seek help from experienced members of staff  including palliative care teams.
  • Elicit needs: physiological, psychological, social, and spiritual. Discuss fears.
  • Establish the wishes of the patient. What trade-off s are they willing to accept, 
eg treatment toxicity for potential time gained? What is unacceptable to them?

  • Consider the views of those important to the patient.
  • Hydration: give support to allow the dying to drink, off er mouth care. Consider 
clinically assisted hydration (parenteral, enteral, intravenous) according to wish-
es and if distressing signs/symptoms of dehydration are possible. Stop according 
to wishes and harm.

  • Manage pain promptly and eff ectively. Treat any reversible causes of pain.
  • Consider a syringe pump if symptom control medications are required more than 

twice in 24 hours (see p536).

  • Anticipate likely symptoms: the PRN side of the drug chart should cover all pos-

sibilities (see p536).

Death may or may not come with peace and acceptance. Patients may rage might-
ily against the dying of the light. Bear witness for them: listen and hold their hand.

Organ donation
Over 6000 people are waiting for an organ transplant in the UK and approximately 
1000 people in need of a transplant will die each year (see p308).

Any patient who is a potential donor can be referred to a specialist organ donation 
service. That service will provide advice as to suitability for transplantation and will 
coordinate the approach to families. They are contactable 24 hours a day and their 
details will be held in your A&E and/or ITU departments.

Organs can be retrieved from:

  • donor after brainstem death or heart-beating donor.
  • donor after cardiac death or non-heart-beating donor. Includes death following 
unsuccessful CPR and patients for whom death is inevitable but do not meet the 
criteria for brainstem death.

There are two legislative frameworks for organ donation:
  • Opt-in. Donors give their explicit consent
  • Opt-out. Anyone who has not actively refused consent is a donor.
The  association  between  an  opt-out  system  and  higher  organ  donation  rates  is 
complicated by the presence of multiple cofounding factors. Non-legislative change 
including national coordination, support and training of clinicians, routine discussion 
as part of end-of-life care, and effi  cient organ retrieval also increase donation rates. 
The ethics of presumed consent should also be considered: the absence of an objec-
tion would not be an acceptable substitute for informed consent in other areas of 
clinical practice.

In the  UK, although consent for transplantation rests with the deceased, if the 
patient’s family or representative cannot support donation then it will not go ahead. 
Register  your  decision  on  the  NHS  Organ  Donor  Register  (https://www.organdonation.
nhs.uk/register-to-donate/register-your-details/) and more importantly, let your family know 
your wishes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   13

_OHCM_10e.indb   13

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
14

Medical ethics

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

‘Our clinical practice is steered by ethical principles. They guide the decisions we 
make in our clinics and ward rounds, what we tell our patients, and what we 
omit to tell them.’ 
Tony Lopez, Journal of Royal Society of Medicine 2001;94:603–4.
In  the  silences  of  our  consultations  it  is  we  who  are  under  the  microscope,  and 
we cannot escape our destiny in the sphere of ethics. To give us courage in this 
enterprise, we can recall the law of the aviator and seagull: it is only by facing the 
prevailing wind that we can become airborne, and achieve a new vantage point from 
which to survey our world. We hope for moral perception: to be able to visualize the 
morally salient features of a situation. For without this, ethical issues may ﬂ oat past 
never to be resolved. Be alert to words which may carry hidden assumptions: ‘futil-
ity’, ‘consent’, ‘best interests’.16 Consider WIGWAM in your routine patient review:
  • Wishes of the patient: are they known or unknown?
  • Issues of conﬁ dentiality/disclosure.
  • Goals of care: are they clear? Whose are they: yours or the patient’s?
  • Wants: to decline treatment or discharge against advice.
  • Arguments between family/friends/doctors.
  • Money: concerns of the patient, concerns of the healthcare provider.
Ethical frameworks
Off er structure, comprehensiveness, and transparency in deliberation.16,17
Four principles
Autonomy: Self governance: the ability of a patient to make a choice based on their 
own values and beliefs. Beneﬁ cence: The obligation to beneﬁ t patients. Links with 
autonomy as beneﬁ t is dependent upon the view of the patient. Non-maleﬁ cence: 
Do not harm. Or more appropriately, do no overall harm: you should stick a needle 
into someone when they need dialysis. Justice: A collection of obligations including 
legality, human rights, fairness, and resource distribution.
Four quadrants method
Medical indications: Identify the clinical problem, treatment options, goals of treat-
ment, and likelihood of success. Patient preferences: What is the patient’s autono-
mous decision? (And is the patient capable of making one? If not, look for previously 
expressed wishes from advanced directives, family, friends, GP.) Quality of life: How 
will the proposed treatment aff ect quality of life? This is subjective: recognize your 
own biases and accommodate those of the patient. Contextual factors: The wider 
context: legal, cultural, religious, familial, and anything else that may impact.

These  frameworks  describe  individual  voices  within  the  ethics  choir.  Sometimes 
there is a beautiful harmony, but how should you act when there is discordance? 
There is no hierarchy within the frameworks. Each component is binding unless it 
is trumped by a stronger principle. How you weigh up and balance the ethical com-
ponents of a situation is not easy, but it should be clear and justiﬁ ed. Know the 
patient. Consult others, especially those who hold diff erent opinions to yourself. Can 
you adequately defend your decision to the patient? Their family? Your consultant? 
Another consultant? A lawyer? If an investigative journalist were to sit on a sulcus 
of yours, having full knowledge of all thoughts and actions, would he be composing 
vitriol for tomorrow’s newspapers? If so, can you answer him, point for point?

Beyond the ethical framework
To  force  an  ethical  problem  to  ﬁ t  a  framework  may  be  inadequate,  reduction-
istic,  and  inconsistent.18  It  is  potentially  biased  towards  Western  culture,  dis-
counts  the  non-autonomous,  and  is  vulnerable  to  poorly  considered  emphasis 
and error. ‘Doing’ ethics can become a check-list exercise where thinking is lost. 
But doctors are not moral philosophers. They are clinicians. A framework there-
fore provides a starting point from which to work. It is the toe which tests the 
water of moral deliberation. Be aware of the cultural setting of your dilemma 
and consider carefully the weight of synthesis. Be prepared to wade deeper if 
needed. But acknowledge that moral wisdom may well be out of your depth. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   14

_OHCM_10e.indb   14

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Psychiatry on medical and surgical wards

15

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

‘Body and soul cannot be separated for purposes of treatment, for they are one 
and indivisible. Sick minds must be healed as well as sick bodies.’  C Jeff  Miller, 1931.

Mental state examination: ASEPTIC
  • Appearance and behaviour: dress, hygiene, eye contact, rapport.
  • Speech: volume, rate, tone.
  • Emotion:  mood  (subjective  and  objective),  aff ect  (how  mood  is  expressed  with 

behaviour—appropriate or incongruent?).

  • Perception: hallucinations—auditory (in the second or third person)?, visual?
  • Thought:

  • Form: block, insertion, broadcast, ﬂ ight of ideas, knight’s move.
  • Content: delusions, obsessions, phobias, preoccupations, self-harm, suicide.

  • Insight: ask the patient why they have presented today.
  • Cognition: orientation, registration, recall, concentration, knowledge.
Do not be afraid to ask about suicidal thoughts and plans. Remove yourself from the 
situation if you feel threatened.
Depression
Two questions can be used to identify depression:19

1      During the last month, have you been bothered by feeling down, depressed, 

or hopeless?

2      During the last month, have you often been bothered by having little interest 

or pleasure in doing things?

If a person answers ‘yes’ to either question they should undergo mental health as-
sessment including a risk assessment of self-harm and suicide. Appropriate treat-
ments  include  psychosocial  intervention  (guided  self-help,  cognitive  behavioural 
therapy, structured physical activity) and medication. Treatment choice depends on 
disease  severity,  previous  psychiatric  history,  response  to  treatment,  and  patient 
preference. If medication is indicated, a generic SSRI should be considered ﬁ rst line 
after consideration of GI bleeding risk, drug interactions, toxicity, overdose, and dis-
continuation symptoms. The full eff ect of medication is gradual, over 4–6 weeks.
Capacity
The Mental Capacity Act (MCA) 2005 has a two-stage test for lack of capacity:

1      There is an impairment or disturbed functioning of the mind.
2      The patient is unable to make a decision.

Decision-making  is  impaired  if  the  patient  is  unable  to:  understand  the  relevant 
information, retain it for long enough to make a decision, weigh up the informa-
tion, communicate their decision. Capacity is decision-speciﬁ c not patient-speciﬁ c. 
When treatment is proposed to those who lack capacity, a capacity advocate should 
be provided. Even patients without capacity should be as involved as possible in 
decision-making.
Mental Health Act (MHA) and common law
A patient can be detained under common law (subject to a test of reasonableness) 
or under the MHA, only if they lack capacity to remain informally and are a danger 
to themselves or others. You will have more experience in verbal and non-verbal 
communication, than in detention under the MHA, so use these skills ﬁ rst to try and 
de-escalate the situation. If rapid tranquillization is needed, be familiar with dosage, 
side-eff ects, and the need for ongoing observation. If there is no history to guide 
choice of medication, intramuscular lorazepam can be used.20
Doctors and mental health
Suicide rates are three times higher in doctors compared to the general population. 
Up to 7% of doctors will have a substance abuse problem within their lifetime. Do 
not ignore feeling low, poor concentration, and reduced energy levels. Do not self-
diagnose and manage. Avoid ‘corridor consultations’. Trust your GP. Seek support:
  • British Medical Association: www.bma.org.uk/doctorsfordoctors.
  • Doctors’ Support Network: www.dsn.org.uk.
  • Doctors’ Support Line: 0844 395 3010.
  • Sick Doctors Trust: www.sick-doctors-trust.co.uk.

_OHCM_10e.indb   15

_OHCM_10e.indb   15

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
16

The older person

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

‘To know how to grow old is the master-work of wisdom, and one of the most 
difﬁ cult chapters in the great art of living.’ 
Henri Amiel, Journal Intime, 21 Sept 1874.
Ageing is an inevitable and irreversible decline in organ function that occurs with 
time, in the absence of injury or illness, and despite the existence of complex path-
ways of maintenance and repair.
Healthy ageing is the maintenance of physical and mental abilities that enable well-
being and independence in older age.
Do not presume ageing. Look for preventable and reversible pathology. Old age 
does not cause disease (although it can increase vulnerability and recovery time).
Look for ways to reduce disability and support older people in their own homes.
Diff  erences in the evaluation of the older person

1      Multiple pathologies: Elderly patients have, on average, six diagnosable disor-

ders. Eff ects may be multiplicative. Treatment must be integrated.

2      Multiple aetiologies: One problem may have several causes, eg falls. Treating 

each alone may do little good, treating all may be of great beneﬁ t.

3      Non-speciﬁ c/atypical  presentation:  Delirium,  dizziness,  falls,  mobility  prob-
lems, weight loss, and incontinence can be due to disorders in more than one 
organ system. Typical signs and symptoms may be absent. Ask about functional 
decline in activities of daily living—this may be the only symptom.

4      Missed or delayed diagnosis: The older person may decline quickly if treat-
ment is delayed. Complications are common. Use a collateral history: what is the 
patient usually like?

5      Pharmacy  and  polypharmacy:  NSAIDS,  anticoagulants,  anti-parkinson  drugs, 
hypoglycaemic drugs, and psychoactive drugs can pose a particular risk in the 
older patient. Double check for interactions. Consider body weight, liver and re-
nal function—drug doses may need to be modiﬁ ed. The STOPP/START criteria detail 
>100 potentially inappropriate prescriptions and prescribing omissions relevant 
to the older patient.21

6      Prolonged recovery time: Anticipate and plan for this. Don’t forget nutrition.
7      Rehabilitation and social factors: Essential for healthy ageing.

A quick ward assessment of the older person
History: In addition to routine elements, include function in activities of daily liv-
ing, continence, and social support. Ask if there is an advanced care directive and 
nominated proxy healthcare decision maker.
Examination:
  • Appearance and aff ect: hygiene, nutrition, hydration. Brieﬂ y assess mood.
  • Senses: vision, hearing, assess swallowing with 20mL of water.
  • Cognition: brief screening test, eg AMTS (p64), 2-step command.
  • Pulse and blood pressure: lying/sitting and standing.
  • Peripheral neurological exam: tone, power, wasting, active range of movement.
  • Other periphery: pulses, oedema, skin integrity, pressure areas.
  • Walking: stand patient, balance, transfers, observe gait (be ready to assist).
  • Other systems: CV, respiratory, abdomen (don’t forget to palpate for bladder).22

Falls
50% aged >80 will fall at least once per year. Falls23 lead to injury, pain, distress, loss 
of conﬁ dence, loss of independence, and mortality. Cost to the NHS is £2.3bn/year.
  • History: frequency, context and circumstances, severity, injuries.
  • Multifactorial risk assessment: gait, balance, muscle strength, osteoporosis risk, 
perceived functional ability, fear of falls, vision, cognition, neurological examina-
tion, continence, home and hazards, cardiovascular examination, medication re-
view.

  • Interventions: strength and balance training, home hazard intervention, correct 
vision, modiﬁ cation/withdrawal of medication (cardiovascular, psychotropic), in-
tegrated management of contributing morbidities. Consider barriers to change, 
eg fear, patient preference.

_OHCM_10e.indb   16

_OHCM_10e.indb   16

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
The pregnant woman

17

Pre-existing conditions and non-obstetric disease cause more maternal deaths in 
the UK than obstetric complications.24
Pregnant women should receive the same investigations and treatment as non-preg-
nant patients, with avoidance of harm/potential harm to the fetus whenever possible.
Most mistakes made in the medical management of pregnant women are due to 
acts of omission caused by inappropriate weighting of risk and beneﬁ t.
Physiological changes in pregnancy
Clinical assessment in pregnancy requires knowledge of the physiological changes 
associated with the gravid state. Expected changes and guidance on when to inves-
tigate for possible underlying pathology is given in table 1.3.
Table 1.3  Physiology and pathology in pregnancy
System
Cardiovascular

Normal pregnancy
BP before 20 weeks’ gestation  Diastolic BP >80mmHg in 1st 

Consider pathology

Respiratory

Renal

 Heart rate
Compensated respiratory 
alkalosis
No change in PEFR
Respiratory rate by 10%
GFR and creatinine clearance

Endocrine
Haematology

Protein excretion
Altered glucose handling 
Haemodilution

trimester
Sustained tachycardia >100/min
Serum bicarbonate <18mmol/L

Decrease in PEFR
Respiratory rate >20/min
Creatinine >85μmol/L (eGFR not valid 
in pregnancy)
Protein:creatinine ratio >30mg/mmol
Fasting glucose >5.0mmol/L
Hb <10.5g/dL, platelets <100x109/L

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Radiology
If the uterus is positioned outside the imaging ﬁ eld of view, the radiation dose to the 
conceptus is minimal. Exposure from the following investigations is well below the 
threshold of risk to the fetus:
  • Plain radiograph: chest, extremities, spine.
  • CT: head, chest (but consider radiation to maternal breast in pregnancy/lactation).
Ultrasound and MRI are preferentially used when imaging the abdomen.
Reassure your pregnant patient that a chest x-ray is safe. It is the equivalent of 3 
days of background radiation. Do not presume it is not required—how else will you 
pick up the widened mediastinum as a cause for her chest pain?
Drugs
For drugs prescribed in pregnancy, beneﬁ t must be balanced against risk (table 1.4). 
For information on drugs in lactation see: https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/lactmed.htm.
Table 1.4  Drugs in pregnancy
Considered safe
Penicillins
Macrolides
Low-molecular-weight heparin
Aspirin
Labetalol
Nifedipine
Adenosine
Prednisolone
Treatment for asthma: salbutamol, ipratropium, 
aminophylline, leukotriene antagonists

Contraindicated
Tetracycline/doxycycline
Ciproﬂ oxacin
Trimethoprim (1st trimester)
NSAIDS (3rd trimester)
ACE-i

ARA
Mycophenolate
Warfarin
Live vaccines (MMR, BCG, Varicella)

Sepsis
Do  not  underestimate  sepsis  in  pregnancy.  Septic  shock  can  be  rapid.  Do  not 
ignore tachypnoea. All pregnant women should receive the inﬂ uenza vaccine.

_OHCM_10e.indb   17

_OHCM_10e.indb   17

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
18

Epidemiology

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

‘The work of epidemiology is related to unanswered questions, but also to un-
questioned answers.’ 
Patricia Buffl  er, North American Congress of Epidemiology, 2011.

Who, what, when, where, why, and how?
Epidemiology is the study of the distribution of clinical phenomena in populations.
It analyses disease in terms of host, agent, and environment (the ‘epidemiologist’s 
triad’). It elucidates risks and mechanisms for the development of disease, and re-
veals potential targets for disease prevention and treatment. Epidemiology does not 
look at the individual patient, but examines a deﬁ ned population. How applicable its 
ﬁ ndings are depend upon how well the sample population mirrors the study popula-
tion, which must, in turn, mirror the target population. Does your patient ﬁ t in this 
‘target’? If ‘yes’, then the epidemiological ﬁ ndings may be applicable.
Measures of disease frequency
Incidence  proportion is the number of new cases of disease as a proportion of 
the population. Synonyms include probability of disease, cumulative incidence, risk.
Incidence rate is the number of new cases per unit of person-time, ie one person 
observed for 5 years contributes 5 person-years of follow-up.
Prevalence is the number of cases that exist at a given time (point prevalence) or 
time-frame (period prevalence), divided by the total population being studied. For 
example, the lifetime prevalence of hiccups is ~100% and incidence is millions/year. 
However, the point prevalence at 3am may be 0 if no one is actually having hiccups.
Comparisons of outcome frequency
Diff erences in outcome rates between populations point to an association between 
the outcome and factors distinguishing the populations (eg a smoking population 
compared to a non-smoking population). Challenges arise as populations tend to 
diff er from each other in many ways, so it may not be clear which factor(s) aff ect 
outcome  frequency.  This  leads  to  confounding.  For  example,  we  might  ﬁ nd  that 
heart disease is more common in those who use walking sticks. But we cannot con-
clude that walking sticks cause heart disease as age is a confounding factor: age is 
causal, not walking sticks.
Ways of accounting for associations: A may cause B (antacids cause cancer), B may 
cause A (cancer causes antacid use), a 3rd unknown agent X (eg age) may cause A 
and B, or the association may be a chance ﬁ nding. When considering the options, it 
is useful to bear in mind the Bradford Hill ‘criteria’ for causation (NB he did not claim 
any were essential):

1      Consistency of ﬁ ndings: among diff erent populations, studies, time periods.
2      Temporality: the eff ect must occur after the cause.
3      Biological gradient: a dose response whereby more exposure = more eff ect.
4      Speciﬁ city: exposure causes a single outcome (smoking does not conform!).
5      Strength of association: strong associations are more likely to be causal.
6      Biological plausibility: there is a mechanism linking cause and eff ect.
7      Coherence: the relationship is supported by current disease knowledge.
8      Experiment: does removal of exposure reduce outcome frequency?

Epidemiological studies
Studies should be designed to give an adequate answer to a speciﬁ c research ques-
tion. Samples need to be representative and of suffi  cient size to answer the question.
Ecological studies: Outcome rates are examined in diff erent populations, eg trend 
over time, geographically distinct groups, social class. Populations rather than indi-
viduals are the unit of study.
Longitudinal (cohort) studies: Subjects are followed over time with measurement 
of exposure and outcome.
Case–control studies: Patients with the outcome of interest are identiﬁ ed and past 
exposure is assessed in comparison to ‘controls’ who did not develop the outcome. 
Cases and controls should be adequately matched for other factors that may aff ect 
outcome, or these diff erences should be corrected for (mathematical assumption).
Experimental  studies:  Exposure  is  allocated  to  a  study  group  and  compared  to 
those who are not exposed, eg randomized controlled trials.

_OHCM_10e.indb   18

_OHCM_10e.indb   18

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
19

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Randomized controlled trials
In a randomized controlled trial (RCT), participants are allocated to an intervention/
exposure (eg new drug treatment) or no intervention (eg placebo, standard care) by 
a process which equates to the ﬂ ip of a coin, ie all participants have an equal chance 
of being in either arm of the study. The aim is to minimize bias and attempt to get at 
the truth as to whether the intervention is any good or not. Both groups are followed 
up and analysed against predeﬁ ned end-points.
Randomizing Done with the aim of eliminating the eff ects of non-studied factors. 
With randomization (and suffi  cient study size) the two arms of the study will be 
identical (on average), with the exception of the intervention of interest.
Blinding There is a risk that factors during the trial may aff ect the outcome, eg 
participant or clinician optimism if they know the patient is on active treatment, or 
an unwillingness to expose more severe disease to placebo. If the subject does not 
know which intervention they are having, the trial is single-blind. Ideally, the experi-
menter should not know either, and the study should be double-blind.
In a good trial, the blind lead the blind.
Journal club: how good is this RCT?
  • Does the study answer a useful question? Does it add to current literature: big-

ger, better, diff erent target population?

  • Does the target population in the study include your patient(s)? Check the inclu-

sion and exclusion criteria including age and comorbidity.

  • Is the intervention well described so it can be replicated in clinical practice?
  • Was the sample size big enough to detect an eff ect? Can you ﬁ nd a sample size 
calculation? Watch out for sub-group analyses for which the sample size was 
not calculated.

  • Were outcome measures predeﬁ ned?
  • Is randomization adequate? Look at the baseline data for each group—are there 
signiﬁ cant diff erences? Are any parameters of interest (that might aff ect out-
come) not included?

  • Who was blinded and how blind were they?
  • Are statistical methods reported and appropriate? There should be a measure of 

the eff ect size and its precision (conﬁ dence interval, see p20).

  • Is the eff ect clinically signiﬁ cant? Watch out for surrogate end-points which do 

not directly measure beneﬁ t, harm, or the treatment response of interest.
  • How long was the follow-up? Was it long enough to determine outcome?
  • How complete was the follow-up? How many patients were left at the end of 
the follow-up period? Were those who left the study included in the analysis 
(intention-to-treat)?25

When a randomized controlled trial might not be the best method
  • Generating new ideas beyond current paradigms (case reports).
  • Researching causes of illnesses and prognoses (cohort studies).
  • Evaluating diagnostic tests (cohort study and decision model).
  • Where the researcher has no idea of the eff ective dose of a drug (dose-ranging 

adaptive design).

  • When recruiting of patients would be impossible or unethical. 
  • When personalized medicine is the aim, eg treatments matched to patients’ bio-

marker proﬁ les (adaptive design, cohort study).

In the end, all randomized trials have to submit to the ultimate test when the sta-
tistical collides with the personal: ‘Will this treatment help me?’, ‘Will this procedure 
help you?’ No randomized trial is complete until real-life decisions taken in the light 
of its ﬁ ndings are scrutinized. Remember Osler: ‘no two individuals react alike and 
behave alike under the abnormal conditions which we know as disease. This is the 
fundamental difﬁ culty of the physician’. Do not ask for deﬁ nitive trials: everything 
is provisional.

_OHCM_10e.indb   19

_OHCM_10e.indb   19

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
20

Medical mathematics

‘When you can measure what you are speaking about, and express it in numbers, 
you know something about it; but when you cannot measure it, when you cannot 
express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meagre and unsatisfactory kind.’
Lord Kelvin, 1883.

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Table 1.5  2≈2 table analysis

Comparison measures
Comparisons  between  ‘exposed’  and  ‘unex-
posed’ populations are made in terms of the risk 
or likelihood of an outcome This can be appreci-
ated by plotting a 2≈2 table (table 1.5).
20
  • Absolute risk difference (attributable risk) 
450
= disease frequency in exposed minus the 
470
disease frequency in unexposed. Example 
(table 1.5): (70/90) Ω (120/570) = 0.57  exposure increases risk by 57%.

Exposure Event No event Total
Yes
90
No
570
Total

70
120
190

Outcome

  • Relative risk = ratio of outcome in exposed population compared to unexposed. 
Relative risk of 1 means risk is same in both populations. Relative risk >1 means ex-
posure increases risk. Relative risk <1 means exposure lessens risk, eg vaccination. 
Example (table 1.5): (70/90)÷(120/570) = 3.69  risk is 3.69 ≈ higher with exposure.
  • Odds ratio = ratio of the probability of an outcome occurring compared to the 
probability of an outcome not occurring. Example (table 1.5): (70/20)÷(120/450) = 
13.13  odds of outcome are 13.13 ≈ higher with exposure.

Relative risk is easier to interpret than odds ratio but relies on a meaningful preva-
lence/incidence. For the individual, absolute risk diff erence may be most relevant.

P-values and conﬁ dence intervals
In a study of two groups (eg new treatment versus placebo), it is possible that 
there is no diff erence (ie new treatment has no beneﬁ t). This is the null hypothesis. 
A p-value measures the strength of evidence in relation to the null hypothesis:
  • Low p-value: data unlikely if null hypothesis is true.
  • High p-value: data likely is null hypothesis is true.
A p-value is not the probability that your results occurred by chance, and it can-
not tell you how good a study is. There will be many assumptions in the statistical 
model. Look at the details: have confounding or bias aff ected the result? Do not 
consider p <0.05 as ‘statistically signiﬁ cant’: a small p-value just ﬂ ags the data 
as unusual.26 You need to question why and decide if this is clinically important.
Conﬁ dence intervals (CI) give a guide to the eff ect size and direction (eg beneﬁ t/
harm). They give a margin of error that indicates the amount of uncertainty in the 
statistical estimate.

Assessing validity
The  validity  of  a  test  which  dichotomizes  study  participants  can  be  assessed  by 
examining the results from the test against a standard reference (or outcome: did 
the participant actually have the disease?) (see table 1.6).
Sensitivity TP/(TP + FN) = of those with the condition, how many test positive? A sensi-
tive test is able to correctly identify those with the disease.
Speciﬁ city TN/(TN + FP) = of those who do not have the condition, how many test 
negative? A speciﬁ c test is able to correctly identify those without a disease.
‘Do they have abdominal pain?’ as a test for appendicitis will have sensitivity (most 
cases have pain), but speciﬁ city (many patients with pain do not have appendicitis).
Positive predictive value (TP/(TP + FP) indicates how likely it is that someone with a 
positive test result has the condition.
Negative predictive value (TN/(TN + FN) indicates how likely it is that someone with a 
negative test result does not have the condition. When you receive a test result, you 
need to know how likely it is to be correct.
Table 1.6  Table of possible test results
Test result
Positive
Negative

Patient does not have condition
False positive (FP)
True negative (TN)

Patient has condition
True positive (TP)
False negative (FN)

_OHCM_10e.indb   20

_OHCM_10e.indb   20

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
21

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Number needed to treat
Number needed to treat (NNT) is a useful way of reporting the results of randomized 
clinical trials. It is the reciprocal of the absolute risk diff erence: 1 ÷ ARR.

A large treatment eff ect means that fewer patients need to receive treatment in 
order for one to beneﬁ t. It is speciﬁ c to the chosen comparator (eg placebo or usual 
care), the measured outcome (eg death, blood pressure fall), and the duration of 
treatment follow-up used in the study. Look carefully at the details of the question 
that the NNT is attempting to quantify.
  • Advantages: easily calculated, single numerical value for effi  cacy, can be used to 

examine harm (becomes the number needed to harm).

  • Disadvantages:  conﬁ dence  intervals  are  diffi  cult  when  the  diff erences  between 

treatments are not signiﬁ cant. 

The doctor as a gambler
Yes or No? Your tutor asks whether Gobble’s disease is commoner in women or 
men. You have no idea, and make a guess. What is the chance of getting it right? 
Common  sense  decrees  that  you  have  a  50:50  chance.  Sod’s  law  predicts  that 
whatever you guess, you will always be wrong. Somewhere between the two is 
Damon Runyon’s view that ‘all life is 6 to 5 against’: Will you pick the right answer? 
Perhaps, but don’t bet on it!
New or existing disease? Suppose singultus is a rare symptom of Gobble’s dis-
ease (seen in 5% of patients), but that it is a very common symptom of Kobble’s 
disease (seen in 90%). If we have a man whom we already know has Gobble’s 
disease, who goes on to develop singultus, is it more likely to be due to Kobble’s, 
rather than Gobble’s disease? The answer is usually no: it is generally the case that 
most symptoms are due to a disease that is already known, and do not imply a 
new disease (Occam’s razor, p4). The ‘odds ratio’ makes this clearer, ie the ratio 
of [the probability of the symptom, given the known disease] to [the probability 
of the symptom due to new disease ≈ the probability of developing the new dis-
ease]. Usually this is vastly in favour of the symptom being due to the old disease, 
because of the prior odds of the two diseases. This will work until Kobble’s dis-
ease increases in prevalence so as to increase the odds of a second disease (then 
Hickam trumps Occam, p4).
How to play the odds It is distasteful to think that doctors can gamble with 
patients’ lives. It is also distasteful to think of serious diseases being ‘missed’, and 
invasive procedures being done unnecessarily. Yet we do not have an evidence 
base or an experience base which can tell us deﬁ nitively which cough or lethargy 
or sore toe is just ‘one of those things’, and which is the result of undiagnosed 
cancer or HIV or osteomyelitis. And so we gamble.

Medicine is not for pessimists—almost anything can be made to seem fatal, so 
that a pessimistic doctor would never get any sleep at night due to worry about 
the meaning of their patients’ symptoms. Medicine is not for blind optimists either, 
who too easily embrace a fool’s paradise of false reassurance. Rather, medicine is 
for informed gamblers: gamblers who are happy to use subtle clues to change their 
outlook from pessimism to optimism and vice versa. Sometimes the gambling is 
scientiﬁ c, rational, methodical, and reproducible (odds ratio); sometimes it instinc-
tual, due to clinical intuition (vital but ill-deﬁ ned).

Of course, gambling inevitably results in losses, and in medicine the chips are 
not just ﬁ nancial. They betoken the health of your patient, your reputation, and 
your conﬁ dence. Perhaps the hardest part of medicine is the inevitability of making 
mistakes whilst attempting to help (see ‘Being wrong’, p5). But do not worry about 
gambling: gambling is your job. If you cannot gamble, you cannot walk the thin line 
between  successfully  addressing  health  needs,  and  causing  over-medicalization 
(p23). But try hard to assemble suffi  cient evidence to maximize the chances of 
being lucky. Lucky gambling is a requisite for successful doctoring and the casino 
of medical practice celebrates the card counter. But the cardinal clinical virtue 
is courage: without it we would not follow our hunches and take justiﬁ ed risks.

_OHCM_10e.indb   21

_OHCM_10e.indb   21

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
22

Evidence-based medicine (EBM)

EBM is the conscientious and judicious use of current, best research evidence to opti-
mize management plans and integrate them with patients’ values by:

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

1      Asking answerable questions.
2      Finding the best information.
3      Appraising the information for quality, validity, and relevance.
4      Dialogue to ﬁ nd out what the patient wants.
5      Applying data to patient care.
6      Evaluation.

The amount of evidence
More than 2 million new biomedical papers are published each year including >20 000 
new randomized trials. Patients beneﬁ t directly from a tiny fraction of these papers. 
How do we ﬁ nd them?
  • A  hierarchy  of  evidence 
(ﬁ g 1.3) is used to identify 
the best research available 
to answer our question.
  • Specialist  EBM  journals, 
eg Evidence-based Med-
icine,  appraise  published 
information  for  quality, 
relevance, and interest on 
our behalf.

  • The  Cochrane  Collabora-
tion gathers and summa-
rizes  best  evidence,  free 
from  commercial  spon-
sorship  and  conﬂ icts  of 
interest. >37 000 research-
ers  from  130  countries 
contribute.

Fig 1.3  Hierarchy of evidence.

EBM Pyramid and EBM Page Generator, copyright 2006 Trustees of 
Dartmouth College and Yale University.

Problems:
  • The concept of scientiﬁ c rigour is opaque. What do we want? The science, the 
rigour, the truth, or what will be most useful to patients? These may overlap, but 
they are not the same. Can average cohort results inform clinical decisions on an 
individual level (especially in the context of comorbidity)?

  • Can we really appraise ALL the evidence? 27 We are hindered by publication bias. 
Around half of all clinical trials remain unpublished. See www.alltrials.net for the cam-
paign to register all trials, and ensure methods and summary results are available.

  • Evidence can be expensive. Who paid the bill and what is their vested interest?
  • Is the result clinically signiﬁ cant? What is the level of beneﬁ t to the individual, as 

opposed to the population? Is the EBM tail wagging the clinical dog?

  • How is our innate hierarchy of evidence constructed? Do we maintain the same 

standard of the evidence for all changes to our practice? 

  • Have you checked the correspondence columns in journals from which winning 

papers are extracted? It may take years for unforeseen ﬂ aws to surface.

  • There is a danger that by always asking, ‘What is the evidence?’, we will divert 

resources from hard-to-prove areas (eg psychosocial interventions).

  • EBM is never 100% up to date and reworking meta-analyses takes time and mon-
ey. Specialists may ostensibly reject a new trial due to a tiny ﬂ aw, when the real 
dread is that it might ﬂ ip their once-perfect formulation.

  • EBM  lies  uncomfortably  in  a  world  of  clinical  intuition  and  instinctual  premoni-

tion. Yet these instincts may be vital.

  • If EBM is prescriptive, patient choice declines. Does our zeal for EBM make us ar-
rogant, mechanical, and defensive? Where is the shared decision-making (p7)?
  • By focusing on answerable questions, EBM can distract us from our patients’ un-
answerable questions; questions that still require time and acknowledgement.

The practice of EBM must be informed by clinical judgement and compassion.

_OHCM_10e.indb   22

_OHCM_10e.indb   22

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Medicalization

23

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
u
o
b
a
g
n
k
n
h
T

i

i

Using Illness as a Metaphor,8 Susan Sontag describes two kingdoms: that of the 
well, and that of the sick. She describes our dual citizenship, and the use of a pass-
port to travel from one kingdom to the other. But medicalization blurs this distinc-
tion.  The boundary between the ‘Kingdom of the Sick’ and the ‘Kingdom of Well’ is 
lost and there is an anschluss of healthy people annexed into the potentially preda-
tory and frightening kingdom of the sick from which there may well be no escape.

‘Too much medicine’ occurs as a result of:
  • Overdiagnosis: Labelling an (asymptomatic) person as ‘sick’ despite the fact that 
subsequent treatment, lifestyle advice, or monitoring provides no beneﬁ t to their 
outcome (and potentially causes harm), eg non-progressive breast cancer.

  • Overdetection: Increasingly sensitive tests identify pathology that is indolent or 
non-progressive, eg subsegmental pulmonary emboli diagnosed on CT angiography.
  • Overdeﬁ niton: Expansion of disease deﬁ nitions or lowering of disease thresholds, 
eg an eGFR diagnosis of chronic kidney disease now means that 1 in 8 adults are 
labelled with the disease, many of whom will never progress to symptomatic kid-
ney failure; 15% of pregnant women now have subclinical hypothyroidism without 
evidence that thyroxine replacement is beneﬁ cial (2016).

  • Disease  mongering:  The  creation  of  pseudodiseases  which  pose  no  threat  to 
health, eg restless legs, sexual health dysfunction, multiple chemical sensitivity.
  • Overutilization: Healthcare practice that provides no net beneﬁ t, eg routine MRI 

for lower back pain.

  • Overtreatment: Treatment that is of no beneﬁ t (and may cause harm), eg antibiot-

ics for viral infections, polypill for the population.

Too much medicine arises from the fear of missing a diagnosis, and concern about 
avoidable morbidity or mortality. A punitive society means there is a perceived need 
for more tests, to seek more certainty. But certainty is the holy grail of myth and 
legend. The individual patient is a unique set of symptoms, stoicism, experience, and 
need. And by the nature of life, all cure can only ever be temporary.
Choosing wisely
CHOOSING WISELY is an initiative to change doctors’ practice away from interventions 
that are not:
  • supported by evidence
  • free from harm
  • truly necessary (including duplicative tests).
The top 5–10 interventions that should not be used routinely are given for each spe-
cialty. Search for those relevant to your current post at: www.choosingwisely.org/doctor-
patient-lists/.

Screening
Consider  medicalization  when  screening  for  disease.  Remember  all  screening 
programmes do harm, some do good. The Wilson criteria for screening lists the 
important  features  necessary  for  a  screening  programme  and  the  mnemonic
IATROGENIC reminds of our pressing duty to do no harm:
1      The condition screened for should be an important one.
2      There should be an acceptable treatment for the disease.
3      Diagnostic and treatment facilities should be available.
4      A recognizable latent or early symptomatic stage is required.
5      Opinions on who to treat must be agreed.
6      The  test  must  be good:  high  discriminatory  power,  valid,  and  reproducible 

with safety guaranteed.

7      The examination must be acceptable to the patient.
8      The untreated natural history of the disease must be known.
9      It should be inexpensive.
10      Screening must be continuous (ie not a ‘one-off ’ aff air).

8  Susan Sontag, Illness as a Metaphor, 1978

_OHCM_10e.indb   23

_OHCM_10e.indb   23

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
2  History and examination

Contents
Taking a history  26
Symptoms  28
Systemic enquiry  30
Physical examination  32
Signs  34

The cardiovascular system:
History  36
Examination  38–41
Pulses  42
The jugular venous pressure (JVP)  43
The heart sounds  44
Cardiac murmurs  46

The respiratory system:
History  48
Examination  50–53
Important presentations  54

The gastrointestinal system:
History  56
Gastrointestinal symptoms  58
Examination of the abdomen  60
The gastrointestinal system: examination  62

The neurological system:
History  64
Neurological examination of the upper 

limbs  66

Neurological examination of the lower 

limbs  68

Cranial nerve examination  70
Cranial nerve lesions of the eye  72
Musculoskeletal hand examination  74

The peripheral vascular system:
Examination  78
Arterial  79
Venous  79

The genitourinary system:
History  80

The breast:
History  82
Examination  83

The thyroid:
Examination  84
Speech and higher mental function  86
Movement disorders  87
Psychiatric assessment  88
Method and order for routine examination  90

Fig  2.1  William  Osler  (1849–1919)  was  a 
great  medical  educationalist  who  loved 
practical  jokes.  He  introduced  many  nov-
elties  to  the  classroom,  including,  on  one 
occasion,  a  gaggle  of  geese.  We  can  all 
identify  with  his  geese,  because  these 
birds  show  exceptional  learning  ability 
and resilience.
Osler did not agree with gavage, a method 
whereby  geese  (and  medical  students) 
are  forcibly  stuff ed  by  funnel  to  fatten 
them  for  the  delight  of  gluttons.  We  are 
too  familiar  with  the  three  Rs  of  medical 
education:  RamRememberRegurgitate, 
a  sequence  that  turns  once-bright  medi-
cal students into tearful wrecks. Luckily in 
the realm of History & Examination we can 
ﬂ ee  the  library  and  alight  at  the  bedside, 
bearing  in  mind  another  of  Osler’s  aphor-
isms:  ‘He  who  studies  medicine  without 
books  sails  an  uncharted  sea,  but  he  who 
studies medicine without patients does not 
go to sea at all.’

We thank Dr Petra Sulentic, our Specialist Reader, for her contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   24

_OHCM_10e.indb   24

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

Advice and experience
1      The way to learn physical signs is at the bedside, with guidance from a senior doc-
tor or an experienced colleague. This chapter is not a substitute for this process: it 
is simply an aide-memoire both on the wards and when preparing for exams.

2      We  ask  questions  to  get  information  to  help  with  diff erential  diagnosis.  But  we 
also  ask  questions  to  ﬁ nd  out  about  the  lives  our  patients  live  so  that  we  can 
respect  them  as  individuals.  The  patient  is  likely  to  notice  and  reciprocate  this 
respect, and the rapport that you build with your patient in this way is a key com-
ponent to diagnosing and managing their disease.

3      Patients  (and  diseases)  rarely  read  textbooks,  so  don’t  be  surprised  that  some 
symptoms are ambiguous, and others meaningless. Get good at recognizing pat-
terns, but not so good that you create them when none exist. We all fall into this 
trap!

4      Signs can be easy to detect, or subtle. Some will be found by all the new medical 
students, others require experienced ears or eyes. Remember, you can be a ﬁ ne 
doctor without being able to elicit every sign.1 However, ﬁ nding signs and put-
ting together the clues they give us to ﬁ nd a diagnosis is one of the best parts of 
being a doctor. It is also essential that we learn those signs that highlight diseases 
we  should  never  miss.  However,  in  an  exam,  if  you  cannot  ﬁ nd  a  sign,  never  be 
tempted to make up something you think should be there. If the examiner is push-
ing you to describe something you cannot see, be honest and admit you cannot 
see it. Learning is a lifelong process, and nobody becomes a consultant overnight.

25

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Developing your own routine
While on the acute medical or surgical take you will ‘clerk’ countless numbers of 
patients. This involves taking a full history: history-taking may seem deceptively 
easy, as if the patient knew the hard facts and the only problem was extracting 
them; but what a patient says is a mixture of hearsay (‘She said I looked very pale’), 
innuendo (‘You know, doctor, down below’), legend (‘I suppose I bit my tongue; it 
was a real ﬁ t, you know’), exaggeration (‘I didn’t sleep a wink’), and improbabilities 
(‘The Pope put a transmitter in my brain’). The great skill (and pleasure) in taking 
a history lies not in ignoring these garbled messages, but in making sense of them. 
Next you will likely perform all the core examinations (cardiovascular, respiratory, 
abdominal, and neurological) and any relevant additional ones (eg breast, thyroid, 
peripheral vascular). No two doctors will have identical examination techniques. 
Relish this variation as it helps you craft your own routine.

An insightful student
Having a template for the all-important history and examination is no more than a 
rough guide and you must ﬂ esh it out with your own learning. We start out nerv-
ous of missing some question or sign, but what we should really be nervous about 
is losing our humanity in the hurly-burly of a time-pressed interview. Here is how 
one student put some ﬂ esh on the bones—for a man in a wheelchair: she asked 
all about the presenting complaint, and how it ﬁ tted in with his CNS condition and 
life at home—and then found out that his daughter had had a nervous breakdown 
at the start of his illness, 5 years ago. ‘How is she now?’ she asked. ‘Fine—I’ve got 
two lovely grand children…Jim is just learning to walk…’ ‘Oh…you must be so busy!’ 
the student said with a joyful smile. This man had not been busy for 5 years, and 
was fed up with his passive dependency. The thought of being busy again made 
his face light up—and when the student left he rose up out of his wheelchair to 
shake her by the hand, a movement we doctors thought was impossible. Jim and 
his grandfather were learning to walk, but this student was up and running—far 
ahead of her teachers.

_OHCM_10e.indb   25

_OHCM_10e.indb   25

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
26

Taking a history

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Taking a good history is an art and an essential skill: 80% of diagnoses should be 
made on history alone, with the signs you elicit adding an extra 10% and tests only 
giving the ﬁ nal 5% or so. Do not rely on signs or investigations for your diagnosis, 
but use them rather to conﬁ rm what you suspected. Try to put the patient at ease: a 
good rapport may relieve distress. Introduce yourself and check whether the patient 
is comfortable. Be conversational rather than interrogative. Start with open ques-
tions, allow the patient to tell their story, but if they stray off  topic, gently steer them 
back towards the important points.
Presenting complaint (PC) Open questions: ‘Why have you come to see me today?’ 
Record the patient’s own words rather than medical terms.
History  of  presenting  complaint  (HPC)  When  did  it  start?  What  was  the  ﬁ rst 
thing noticed? Progress since then. Ever had it before? ‘SOCRATES’ questions: site; 
onset (gradual, sudden); character; radiation; associations (eg nausea, sweating); 
timing of pain/duration; exacerbating and alleviating factors; severity (eg scale of 
1–10, compared with worst ever previous pain). Direct questioning (to narrow list of 
possible diagnoses). Speciﬁ c or ‘closed’ questions about the diff erential diagnoses 
you have in mind (+risk factors, eg travel—p414) and a review of the relevant system.
Past medical history (PMH) Ever in hospital? Illnesses? Operations? Ask speciﬁ -
cally about MIJTHREADS: MI, jaundice, TB, high BP, rheumatic fever, epilepsy, asthma, 
diabetes, stroke, anaesthetic problems.
Drug history (DH) Any tablets, injections, ‘over-the-counter’ drugs, herbal remedies, 
oral contraceptives? Ask about allergies and what the patient experienced, eg may 
be an intolerance (nausea, diarrhoea), or may have been a minor reaction of sensiti-
zation (eg rash and wheeze) before full-blown anaphylaxis.
Social history (SH) Probe without prying. ‘Who else is there at home?’ Job. Marital 
status. Spouse’s job and health. Housing—any stairs at home? Who visits—relatives, 
neighbours, GP, nurse? Are there any dependants at home? Mobility—any walking 
aids needed? Who does the cooking and shopping? What can the patient not do be-
cause of the illness? Ask about occupation, hobbies, sport, exercise, and ethnic origin.
The social history is all too often seen as a dispensable adjunct but vital clues may 
be missed about the quality of life and it is too late to ask when the surgeon’s hand is 
deep in the belly and they are wondering how radical a procedure to perform. Utilize 
the GP’s knowledge of the patient: they may have known them and/or their family for 
decades. He or she may even hold a ‘living will’ or advance directive if they cannot 
speak for themselves. Tactfully ask about alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drugs. 
How much? How long? When stopped? 1 unit = 8g of ethanol = 1 spirits measure = 1/2 
glass of wine = 1/3 pint of beer. The CAGE questionnaire is a useful screening test for 
alcoholism (p281). Quantify smoking in terms of pack-years: 20 cigarettes/day for 1 
year equals 1 pack-year. We all like to present ourselves well, so be inclined to double 
stated quantities (Holt’s ‘law’).
Family history (FH) Areas of the family history may need detailed questioning, eg 
to determine if there is a signiﬁ cant family history of heart disease you need to ask 
about the health of the patient’s grandfathers and male siblings, smoking, tendency 
to hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and claudication before they were 60 years old, as 
well as ascertaining the cause of death. Ask about TB, diabetes, and other relevant 
diseases. Draw a family tree (see  BOX). Be  tactful  when  asking  about  a  family 
history of malignancy.
Systemic enquiry (See p30.) Helps uncover undeclared symptoms. Some of this 
may already have been incorporated into the history.
 Always enquire, without sounding robotic, if your patient has any ideas of what 
the problem might be, if he/she has any particular concerns or expectations, and 
give him/her an opportunity to ask  you  questions or tell  you  anything  you  may 
have missed.
Don’t hesitate to review the history later: recollections change (as you will ﬁ nd, 
often on the post-take ward round when the Consultant is asking the questions!).

_OHCM_10e.indb   26

_OHCM_10e.indb   26

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
27

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Drawing family trees to reveal dominantly inherited disease 
Advances in genetics are touching all branches of medicine. It is increasingly im-
portant for doctors to identify patients at high risk of genetic disease, and to make 
appropriate referrals. The key skill is drawing a family tree to help you structure 
a family history as follows:
1      Start with your patient. Draw a square for a male and a circle for a female. Add 
a small arrow (see ﬁ g 2.2) to show that this person is the propositus (the person 
through whom the family tree is ascertained).

2      Add your patient’s parents, brothers, and sisters. Record basic information only, 
eg age, and if alive and well (a&w). If dead, note age and cause of death, and 
pass an oblique stroke through that person’s symbol.

3      Ask the key question ‘Has anybody else in your family had a similar problem 
as yourself?’, eg heart attack/angina/stroke/cancer. Ask only about the family 
of diseases that relate to your patient’s main problem. Do not record a potted 
medical history for each family member: time is too short.

4      Extend the family tree upwards to include grandparents. If you haven’t revealed 
a problem by now, go no further—you are unlikely to miss important familial 
disease. If your patient is elderly it may be impossible to obtain good informa-
tion about grandparents. If so, ﬁ ll out the family tree with your patient’s uncles 
and aunts on both the mother’s and father’s sides.

5      Shade those in the family tree aff ected by the disease. • = an aff ected female; 
 = an aff ected male. This helps to show any genetic problem and, if there is one, 
will help demonstrate the pattern of inheritance.

6      If you have identiﬁ ed a familial susceptibility, or your patient has a recognized 
genetic disease, extend the family tree down to include children, to identify 
others who may be at risk and who may beneﬁ t from screening. You should 
ﬁ nd out who is pregnant in the family, or may soon be, and arrange appropriate 
genetic counselling (OHCS p154). Refer for genetics opinion.

The family tree (ﬁ g 2.2) shows these ideas at work and indicates that there is 
evidence for genetic risk of colon cancer, meriting referral to a geneticist. N.B: use 
a diff erent approach in paediatrics, and for autosomal or sex-linked disease. Ask if 
parents are related (consanguinity risk of recessive diseases).

Fig 2.2  Genetic risk of colon cancer in a family tree.

Acknowlegement
The box in this section owes much to Dr Helen Firth, who we thank.

_OHCM_10e.indb   27

_OHCM_10e.indb   27

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
28

Symptoms

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Symptoms are features which patients report. Physical signs are elicited at the 
bedside.  Together,  they  constitute  the  features  of  the  condition  in  that  patient. 
Their evolution over time and interaction with the physical, psychological, and social 
spheres comprise the natural history of any disease. Throughout this chapter, we 
discuss symptoms in isolation and attempt to classify them into a ‘system’ or present 
them in the following BOXES as ‘non-speciﬁ c’. This is unnatural but a good ﬁ rst step in 
learning how to diagnose. All doctors have to know about symptoms and their relief. 
Part of becoming a good doctor is learning to link symptoms together, to identify 
those that may be normal, and those that are worrying. There are many online tools 
and books that can help with this, but there is no substitute for experience. If you 
aren’t sure, ask a specialist in that area for advice.

The following are common ‘non-speciﬁ c’ presentations.

Itch
Itching (pruritus) Common and, if chronic, most unpleasant.
Table 2.1  Aetiology of pruritus

Local causes
Eczema, atopy, urticaria
Scabies
Lichen planus
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Spinal cord tumours (rare)2

Systemic (do FBC, ESR, glucose, LFT, U&E, ferritin, TFT)
Liver disease (bile salts, eg PBC) Old age; pregnancy
Uraemia (eg CKD)
Malignancy (eg lymphoma)
Polycythaemia rubra vera
Iron deﬁ ciency anaemia

Drugs (eg morphine)
Diabetes mellitus
Thyroid disease
HIV infection

Questions: Wheals (urticaria)? Worse at night? Others aff ected (scabies)? What 
provokes it? After a bath ≈ polycythaemia rubra vera (p366). Exposure, eg to ani-
mals (atopy?) or ﬁ bre glass (irritant eczema?).
See table 2.1. Look for local causes: Scabies burrows in ﬁ nger webs, lice on hair 
shafts, knee and elbow blisters (dermatitis herpetiformis). Systemic: Splenomeg-
aly, nodes, jaundice, ﬂ ushed face, or thyroid signs? : Treat causes; try soothing 
bland emollients ± emollient bath oils ± sedative antihistamines at night, eg chlor-
phenamine 4mg PO.

‘Off  -legs’—falls and diffi  culty walking
Common causes of admission in the elderly, and can lead to loss of conﬁ dence and 
independence. Causes are often multifactorial:
Intrinsic: Typically osteo- or rheumatoid arthritis, but remember fractured neck 
of femur, CNS disease,  vision, cognitive impairment, depression, postural hypoten-
sion,  periph eral  neuropathy,  medication  (eg  antihypertensives,  sedatives),  pain, 
eg arthritis, parkinsonism (eg drugs: prochlorperazine, neuroleptics, metoclopra-
mide), muscle weakness (consider vitamin D deﬁ ciency), incontinence, UTI, pneu-
monia, anaemia, hypothyroidism, renal impairment, hypothermia, and alcohol.
Environ ment: Poor lighting, uneven walking surface. Treatment includes address-
ing injuries, reducing risk factors, and reducing the risk of injury, eg treat osteopo-
rosis (p682). A multidisciplinary multifactorial approach alongside occupational 
therapists and physiotherapists is likely to be beneﬁ cial. See gait disorders, p467.
If there is ataxia, the cause is not always alcohol: other chemicals may be involved 
(eg cannabis or prescribed sedatives). There may be a metastatic or non-meta-
static manifestation of malignancy, or a cerebellar lesion.
Bilateral weak legs may suggest a cord lesion: see p466. If there is associated 
urinary or faecal incontinence ± saddle anaesthesia or lower limb sensory loss, 
urgent imaging (MRI) and treatment for cord compression may well be needed.

_OHCM_10e.indb   28

_OHCM_10e.indb   28

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
29

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fatigue
So common that it is a variant of normality. Only 1 in 400 episodes of fatigue leads 
to visiting the doctor. Don’t miss depression (p15). Even if depressed, still rule out 
common treatable causes—eg anaemia, hypothyroidism, diabetes. After history 
and examination: FBC, ESR, U&E, plasma glucose, TFT, ± CXR. Follow up to see what 
develops, and to address emotional problems. Take a sleep history.

Fevers, rigors, sweats
While  some  night  sweating  is  common  in  anxiety,  drenching  sweats  requiring 
changes of night-clothes are a more ominous symptom associated with infection 
(eg TB, brucellosis), lymphoproliferative disease, or other malignancies. Patterns 
of fever may be relevant (see p442).
Rigors are uncontrolled paroxysms of shivering which occur as a patient’s tem-
perature rises rapidly.
Sweating  excessively  (hyperhidrosis)  may  be  primary  (eg  hidradenitis  sup-
purativa may be very distressing to the patient)—or secondary to fever, pain or 
anxiety (cold & sweaty) or a systemic condition: the menopause, hyperthyroidism 
(warm & sweaty), acromegaly, malignancy, phaeochromocytoma, amyloidosis, or 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome (+hyper thermia). Or it may reﬂ ect gabapentin 
or opiate withdrawal, or a cholin er gic or parasympathomimetic side-eff ect (ami-
triptyline, bethanechol, distigmine, spider bites)—also hormonal drugs, eg levo-
thyroxine, gonadorelin or somatostatin analog ues, vasopressin, and ephedrine. Also 
amiodarone, ciproﬂ oxacin, levodopa, lisinopril, rivastigmine, ritonavir, pioglitazone, 
venlafaxine. At the bedside: ask about all drugs, examine all over for nodes; any 
signs of hyperthyroidism? Any spleno megaly? Test the urine; do T°, ESR, TSH, FBC, & 
blood culture. : Antiperspirants (aluminium chloride 20%=Driclor®), sympathec-
tomy, or iontophoresis may be tried.

Insomnia
This is trivial—until we ourselves have a few sleepless nights. Then sleep becomes 
the most desirable thing imaginable, and bestowing it the best thing we can do, 
like relieving pain. But don’t give drugs without looking for a cause.
  • Self-limiting: Jet lag; stress; shift work; in hospital. We need less sleep as we age.
  • Psychic: Depression; anxiety; mania; grief; psychomotor agitation/psychosis.
  • Organic: Drugs (many; eg caff eine; meﬂ oquine; nicotine withdrawal); nocturia; 
alcohol; pain (eg acid reﬂ ux—worse on lying down); itch; tinnitus; asthma; dys-
tonias; obstructive sleep apnoea (p194); dementia; restless leg syndrome (p698, 
check  ferritin).  Rarer:  encephalitis  (eg  West  Nile  virus)  and  encephalopathy 
(Whipple’s; pellagra; HIV; prion diseases, eg CJD, p696, and fatal familial insomnia).
:Sleep hygiene. No daytime naps; don’t turn in till you feel sleepy; regular bed-
time routines. Keep a room for sleep; don’t eat or work in it (not viable for much 
of the world). Less caff eine, nicotine, late exercise (but sexual activity may give 
excellent torpor!), and alcohol (its abuse causes paradoxical pro-adrenergic trem-
or and insomnia). Try monitoring quality with a sleep diary (unless already over-
obsessive). Music and relaxation may make sleep more restorative and augment 
personal resources.
Hypnotic drugs. Give for a few nights only (addictive and cause daytime somno-
lence ± rebound insomnia on stopping). Warn about driving/machine use. Exam-
ple: zopiclone 3.75–7.5mg. Obstructive sleep apnoea, p194. Parasomnias,  sleep 
paralysis, etc. OHCS p371. Narcolepsy, p700.

_OHCM_10e.indb   29

_OHCM_10e.indb   29

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
30

Systemic enquiry

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Just as skilled acrobats are happy to work without safety nets, so experienced clini-
cians may operate without the functional enquiry. But to do this you must be experi-
enced enough to understand all the nuances of the presenting complaint.
General questions
May be the most signiﬁ cant, eg in TB, endocrine problems, or cancer:
  • Weight loss.
  • Night sweats.
  • Any lumps.
  • Fatigue/malaise/lethargy.
  • Sleeping pattern.1
  • Appetite.
  • Fevers.
  • Itch or rash.
  • Recent trauma.
Cardiorespiratory symptoms
  • Chest pain (p94).
  • Exertional dyspnoea (=breathlessness): quantify exercise tolerance and how it has 
changed, eg stairs climbed, or distance walked, before onset of breathlessness.
  • Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (PND). Orthopnoea, ie breathlessness on lying ﬂ at 
(a symptom of left ventricular failure): quantify in terms of number of pillows the 
patient must sleep on to prevent dyspnoea.

  • Oedema: ankles, legs, lower back (dependent areas).
  • Palpitations (awareness of heartbeats): can they tap out the rhythm?
  • Cough: sputum, haemoptysis (coughing up blood).
  • Wheeze.
Gastrointestinal symptoms
  • Abdominal pain (constant or colicky, sharp or dull; site; radiation; duration; onset; 
severity; relationship to eating and bowel action; alleviating or exacerbating, or 
associated features).

  • Other questions—think of symptoms throughout the GI tract, from mouth to anus:

  • Swallowing (p250).
  • Indigestion (p252).
  • Nausea/vomiting; blood? (p250).
  • Bowel habit (p258 & p260).
  • Stool: colour, consistency, blood, mucus; diffi  culty ﬂ ushing away (p266); tenes-

mus or urgency.

Tenesmus is the feeling of incomplete evacuation of the bowels (eg due to a tumour 
or irritable bowel syndrome). Haematemesis is vomiting blood. Melaena is altered 
(black)  blood  passed  PR  (p256),  with  a  characteristic  off ensive  smell  and  tar  like 
appearance.
Genitourinary symptoms
  • Incontinence (stress or urge, p648).
  • Dysuria (painful micturition).
  • Urinary abnormalities: colour? Haematuria (streaks or pink urine?) Frothy?
  • Nocturia (needing to micturate at night).
  • Frequency (frequent micturition) or polyuria (the frequent passing of large vol-

umes of urine).

  • Hesitancy (diffi  culty starting micturition).
  • Terminal dribbling.
  • Vaginal discharge (colour, odour); pain on intercourse (dyspareunia) (p412).
  • Menses: frequency, regularity, heavy or light, duration, painful? First day of last 
menstrual period (LMP). Number of pregnancies and births. Menarche. Menopause. 
Any chance of pregnancy now?

1  Too sleepy? Think of myxoedema or narcolepsy. Early waking? Think of depression. Being woken by pain is 
always a serious sign. For the signiﬁ cance of the other questions listed here, see Chapter 3.

_OHCM_10e.indb   30

_OHCM_10e.indb   30

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Neurological symptoms
  • Special senses: sight, hearing, smell, and taste.
  • Seizures, faints, ‘funny turns’.
  • Headache.
  • ‘Pins and needles’ (paraesthesiae) or numbness.
  • Limb weakness (‘Are your arms and legs weaker than normal?’), poor balance.
  • Speech problems (p86).
  • Sphincter disturbance.
  • Higher mental function and psychiatric symptoms (p86–p89). The important thing 

is to assess function: what the patient can and cannot do at home, work, etc.

Musculoskeletal symptoms
  • Pain, stiff ness, swelling of joints.
  • Diurnal variation in symptoms (ie worse in mornings).
  • Functional deﬁ cit.
  • Signs of systemic disease: rashes, mouth ulcers, nasal stuffi  ness, malaise, and con-

stitutional symptoms.

Thyroid symptoms
  • Hyperthyroidism:  Prefers  cold  weather,  bad  tempered,  sweaty,  diarrhoea,  oli-
gomenorrhoea, weight (though often appetite), tremor, palpitations, visual prob-
lems.

  • Hypothyroidism: Depressed, slow, tired, thin hair, croaky voice, heavy periods, con-

stipation, dry skin, prefers warm weather.

31

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

_OHCM_10e.indb   31

_OHCM_10e.indb   31

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
32

Physical examination

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The physical examination is not so much an extension of the history, but more of the 
ﬁ rst investigation, to conﬁ rm, exclude, deﬁ ne, or show the progress of the provi-
sional diagnosis as revealed in the history. Even in the emergency department where 
the history may be brief, eg ‘trauma’, the examination is to conﬁ rm a fracture, or to 
decide that a fracture is less likely. The examination sheds further light on the his-
tory. As you get better, your physical examination gets briefer. Establish your own 
routine—practice is the key.
End of the bed
  • Look at the patient—are they well or in extremis? What makes you think this? 
Are they in pain? If so, does it make them lie still (eg peritonitis) or writhe about 
(eg colic)? What is the pattern of breathing: laboured; rapid; shallow; irregular; 
distressed? Are they obese or cachectic? Is their behaviour appropriate? Can you 
detect any unusual smell, eg hepatic fetor (p274), cigarettes, alcohol?

  • Also take a moment to look around the bed for other clues, eg inhalers, insulin 

administration kit, walking aids, etc.

Face and body habitus
  • Does the patient’s appearance suggest any particular diseases, eg acromegaly, thy-

rotoxicosis, myxoedema, Cushing’s syndrome, or hypopituitarism? See p202.

  • Is there an abnormal distribution of body hair (eg bearded , or hairless ) sug-

gestive of endocrine disease?

  • Is there anything about the patient to trigger thoughts about Paget’s disease, Mar-
fan’s, myotonia, or Parkinson’s syndrome? Look for rashes, eg the malar ﬂ ush of 
mitral disease and the butterﬂ y rash of SLE.

Peripheral stigmata of disease
Speciﬁ c signs are associated with diff erent diseases: consider the nails (koilonychia 
= iron deﬁ ciency), subcutaneous nodules (rheumatoid, neuroﬁ broma?), and look for 
lymph nodes (cervical, axillary, inguinal). See speciﬁ c systems for features to assess 
for, but for all systems consider:
Skin colour:
  • Blue/purple = cyanosis (can also be central only, p34).
  • Yellow = jaundice (yellow skin can also be caused by uraemia, pernicious anaemia, 

carotenaemia—check the sclera: if they are also yellow it is jaundice).

  • Pallor: this is non-speciﬁ c; anaemia is assessed from the palmar skin creases (when 
spread) and conjunctivae (ﬁ g 8.3)—usually pale if Hb <80–90g/L: you cannot con-
clude anything from normal conjunctival colour, but if they are pale, the patient is 
probably anaemic.

  • Hyperpigmentation:  Addison’s,  haemo chromatosis  (slate-grey)  and  amiodarone, 

gold, silver, and minocycline therapy.

Charts:
  • Temperature: varies during the day; a morning oral temperature >37.2°C or evening 
>37.7°C constitutes a fever.3 Rectal temperatures are generally 0.6°C above oral 
temperatures. Remember that temperatures are generally lower in elderly patients 
and therefore fevers may not be as pronounced.4 A core temperature <35°C indi-
cates hypothermia; special low-reading thermometers may be required.

  • Blood pressure and pulse—trends are more important than one-off  values; repeat 

if concerned.

  • Urine: check urinalysis and input/output charts if available.
Fluid status When admitting an unwell patient, don’t forget to assess their hydra-
tion, check skin turgor and mucous membranes, look for sunken eyes, and check 
capillary reﬁ ll (if well perfused <2s) and JVP.

_OHCM_10e.indb   32

_OHCM_10e.indb   32

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Unexplained signs and symptoms: how to refer for an opinion
When you don’t know: ask. If you are wondering if you should ask: ask.
Frequently, the skills needed for diagnosis or treatment will lie beyond the team 
you are working for, so, during ward rounds, agree who should be asked for an 
opinion. You will be left with the job of making the arrangements, so check before 
your senior leaves exactly what their question is. Don’t be intimidated, but follow 
these simple rules:
  • Know the history and examination ﬁ ndings (ideally your own), and have the pa-
tient’s notes, observations, recent test results, and drug charts to hand (table 2.2).
  • At the outset, state if you are just looking for advice or if you are asking if the 
patient could be seen. Make it clear exactly what the question is that you want 
addressed, allowing the listener to focus their thoughts and ask relevant questions.
  • Give the patient’s age and run through a brief history including relevant past 
medical history. If you would like the patient to be seen, give warning if they will 
be leaving the ward for a test at a particular time.

  • The visiting doctor may be unfamiliar with your ward. When he or she arrives 
introduce yourself, get the notes and charts, and give your contact details in case 
they have further questions.

33

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Dermatology

Endocrinology

Gastroenterology/
Hepatology

Gynaecology/
Obstetrics
Haematology

Table 2.2  Referring for a specialist opinion
Key questions
Team
Previous anaesthetic? Reaction? Last ate/drank?
Anaesthetics
Known IHD? BP? ECG ﬁ ndings? Echo ﬁ ndings? Murmurs? 
Cardiology
Troponin? Temperature/possibility of endocarditis? (ESR, 
microscopic haematuria, etc. p150)
Site, onset, and appearance of rash? Drugs? Systemic disease? 
History of atopy? 
Diabetes: blood glucose, usual insulin regimen, complications. 
Other: blood results? Stable/unstable—eg Addisonian crisis. 
Usual steroid dose?
Bleeding: Rockall score (p257)? Shock? Diarrhoea: blood? 
Foreign travel? Frequency per day? Liver disease: signs of 
decompensation (p274)? Ascites? Encephalopathy grade?
LMP? Possibility of pregnancy? Previous pregnancies? Vaginal 
discharge? Hormonal contraceptives? STIS?
Blood results? Splenomegaly? Fever? Lymphadenopathy? 
Bleeding: anticoagulants? Clotting results? 
Possible source? Antibiotics (current/recent/previous)? 
Foreign travel? Risk factors for HIV? 
Creatinine (current, old)? Clotting? Urine output? Potassium? 
BP? Fluid status? Drugs? Known renal disease?
Neurological examination?* CT/MRI scan ﬁ ndings? 
See p720. Contrast or not? Creatinine? Clotting? Cannula in 
situ? Metallic implants?
O2 sats? Respiratory rate? ABG? CXR? Inhalers/nebs? Home O2? 
Respiratory support, eg NIV/CPAP?
Pain? Scan ﬁ ndings? Acutely unwell? Clotting? 
History of LUTS (lower urinary tract symptoms) p642? 
Catheter? Haematuria? History of stones? Scan ﬁ ndings 
(ultrasound, CT)?

Infectious diseases/
Microbiology
Nephrology

Neurology/Stroke
Radiology

Surgery (general)
Urology

Respiratory

*You would be amazed at how many people refer to neurology/stroke without having done a neurologi-
cal examination! Don’t be one of them...

_OHCM_10e.indb   33

_OHCM_10e.indb   33

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
34

Signs

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The following signs are not speciﬁ c to a particular system:
Cyanosis
Dusky blue skin (peripheral—of the ﬁ ngers) or mucosae (central—of the tongue), 
representing 50g/L of Hb in its reduced (hence hypoxic) form, it occurs more readily 
in polycythaemia than anaemia.
Causes:
  • Lung disease with inadequate oxygen transfer, eg luminal obstruction, asthma, 

COPD, pneumonia, PE, pulmonary oedema—may be correctable by  inspired O2.

  • Congenital cyanotic heart disease, where there is a mixture, eg transposition of 
the great arteries or right-to-left shunt (eg VSD with Eisenmenger’s syndrome; see 
p156)—cyanosis is not reversed by increasing inspired oxygen.

  • Rare causes—methaemoglobinaemia, a congenital or acquired red cell disorder.
Acute cyanosis is an emergency. Is there asthma, an inhaled foreign body, a pneu-
mothorax (p749, ﬁ g 1) or pulmonary oedema? See p814.
Peripheral cyanosis will occur in causes of central cyanosis, but may also be induced 
by changes in the peripheral and cutaneous vascular systems in patients with nor-
mal oxygen saturations. It occurs in the cold, in hypovolaemia, and in arterial disease, 
and is, therefore, not a speciﬁ c sign.
Pallor
May  be  racial  or  familial—or  from  anaemia,  shock/faints,  Stokes–Adams  attack 
(p460, pale ﬁ rst, then ﬂ ushing), hypothyroid ism, hypopituitarism, and albinism.
Anaemia is haemoglobin concentration <130g/L in men and <120g/L in non-pregnant 
women (p324). It may be assessed from the conjunctivae and skin creases. Koilo-
nychia and stomatitis (p32) suggest iron deﬁ ciency. Anaemia with jaundice suggests 
haemolysis. If pallor just one limb or digit, think of emboli.
Skin discolouration
Generalized hyperpigmentation may be genetic (racial) or due to radiation; ACTH 
(cross-reacts  with  melanin  receptors,  eg  Addison’s  disease  (p226),  Nelson’s  syn-
drome (p76), ectopic  ACTH in bronchial carcinoma); chronic kidney disease (urea, 
p302); malabsorption; chloasma (seen in pregnancy or with the oral contraceptive 
pill);  biliary  cirrhosis;  haemochromatosis  (‘bronzed  diabetes’);  carotenaemia;  or 
drugs (eg chlorpromazine, busulfan, amiodarone, gold).
Obesity
Deﬁ ned by the World Health Organization as a BMI of over 30kg/m2. A higher waist 
to hip ratio, indicating central fat distribution, is commoner in  and is associated 
with greater health risks, which include type 2 diabetes mellitus, IHD, dyslipidaemia, 
BP, osteoarthritis of weight-bearing joints, and cancer (breast and bowel); see p206. 
The majority of cases are not due to speciﬁ c metabolic disorders. Lifestyle change is 
key to treatment, to increase energy expenditure and reduce intake (p244). Medica-
tion ± surgery may be considered if the patient fulﬁ ls strict criteria (BMI of 40 kg/m2 
or more, or between 35 kg/m2 and 40 kg/m2 and other signiﬁ cant disease that could 
improve with weight loss, non-surgical measures have been tried and failed, patient 
receives intensive management in a tier 3 service, and ﬁ t for anaesthesia and sur-
gery). Conditions associated with obesity include: genetic (Prader–Willi syndrome, 
Lawrence–Moon syndrome), hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, and hypothalamic 
damage (eg tumour or trauma  damage to satiety regions).

_OHCM_10e.indb   34

_OHCM_10e.indb   34

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
35

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Lymphadenopathy
Causes of lymphadenopathy are either reactive or inﬁ ltrative:
Reactive:
Infective:
  • Bacterial: eg pyogenic, TB, brucella, syphilis.
  • Viral: EBV, HIV, CMV, infectious hepatitis.
  • Others: toxoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis.
Non-infective:  sarcoidosis,  amyloidosis,  berylliosis,  connective  tissue  disease  (eg 
rheumatoid, SLE), dermatological (eczema, psoriasis), drugs (eg phenytoin).
Inﬁ ltrative:
Benign histiocytosis—OHCS p644, lipoidoses.
Malignant:
  • Haematological: lymphoma or leukaemia: ALL, CLL, AML (p356).
  • Metastatic  carcinoma:  from  breast,  lung,  bowel,  prostate,  kidney,  or  head  and 

neck cancers.

Oedema
(See p579.)
Pitting oedema: Fluid can either be squeezed out of the veins (increased hydrostatic 
pressure, eg DVT, right heart failure) or diff use out because of reduced oncotic pres-
sure (low plasma proteins, eg cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing enter-
opathy) leading to an osmotic gradient with the tissues (ﬁ g 2.9, p39, p579). The cause 
of oedema is still not completely understood.5
Periorbital oedema: Oedema around the face has a very diff erent diff erential; the 
eyelid skin is very thin so periorbital oedema is usually the ﬁ rst sign—think of al-
lergies  (contact  dermatitis,  eg  from  eye  make-up,  stings),  angioedema  (can  be 
hereditary),  infection  (orbital  cellulitis  can  be  life-threatening,  refer  to  hospital 
immediately if concerned, other infections include EBV and sinusitis); if there is prop-
tosis (p219) think Graves’ disease, connective tissue diseases (eg dermatomyositis, 
SLE, sarcoid, amyloid); and many others. Assess for systemic disease before putting 
it down to allergies.
Non-pitting  oedema:  Ie  non-indentable,  is  lymphoedema  due  to  poor  lymphatic 
drainage. Can be due to radiotherapy, malignant inﬁ ltration, infection, ﬁ lariasis, or 
rarely primary lymphoedema (Milroy’s syndrome p706).
Weight loss
Weight loss can be both a symptom (ie reported by the patient) and a sign (identiﬁ ed 
by physician). A feature of chronic disease, depression, malnutrition, malignancy, 
chronic infections (eg TB, HIV/enteropathic AIDS), diabetes mellitus, and hyperthy-
roidism  (typically  in  the  presence  of  increased  appetite).  Severe  generalized 
muscle wasting is also seen as part of a number of degenerative neurological 
diseases and in cardiac failure (cardiac cachexia), although in the latter, right 
heart failure may not make weight loss a major complaint. Do not forget ano-
rexia nervosa (OHCS p382) as an underlying cause of weight loss.

Rule out treatable causes, eg diabetes is easy to diagnose—TB can be very hard. For 
example, the CXR may look like cancer so don’t forget to send bronchoscopy samples 
for ZN stain and TB culture. Unintentional weight loss should always ring alarm bells, 
so assess patients carefully.
Cachexia
General muscle wasting from famine, or eating (dementia; stroke; MND, p506; ano-
rexia  nervosa),  malabsorption  (entero pathic  AIDS/slim  disease/Crypto spor idium; 
Whipple’s) or catabolism (neoplasia; CCF; TB; chronic kidney disease; leptin).6

_OHCM_10e.indb   35

_OHCM_10e.indb   35

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
36

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The cardiovascular system: history
Table 2.3  Presenting symptoms and questions to ask
Presenting 
symptoms
Chest pain
(see pp94–5 
and p784)

Direct questions

Site? Central?
Onset? (Sudden? What was the patient doing?)
Character? Ask patient to describe pain (Crushing? Heavy?).
Radiation? Ask speciﬁ cally if moves to arm, neck, or jaw?
Associations? Ask speciﬁ cally about shortness of breath, nausea, sweating.
Timing? Duration?
Exacerbating and alleviating factors? Worse with respiration or move-
ment (less likely to be angina)? Relieved by GTN? Worse on inspiration 
and better when sitting forwards (pericarditis)?
Severity: out of 10?
Is patient known to have angina or chest pain; better/worse/same as 
usual pain; is it more frequent? Decreasing exercise tolerance?
NB: ‘heartburn’ more likely if ‘burning’, onset after eating/drinking, 
worse lying ﬂ at, or associated with dysphagia.
‘Ever aware of your own heartbeat’? When and how did it start/stop? 
Duration? Onset sudden/gradual? Associated with blackout (how 
long)? Chest pain? Dyspnoea? Food related (eg caff eine)?
Regular fast palpitations may reﬂ ect paroxysmal supraventricular 
tachycardia (SVT) or ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Irregular fast palpitations are likely to be paroxysmal AF, or atrial ﬂ ut-
ter with variable block.
Dropped or missed beats related to rest, recumbency, or eating are 
likely to be atrial or ventricular ectopics.
Regular pounding may be due to anxiety.
Slow palpitations are likely to be due to drugs such as -blockers, or 
bigeminus (ﬁ g 3.34, p129).
Reassurance is vital and can be therapeutic. Check a TSH and consider a 
24h ECG (Holter monitor, p125). An event recorder, if available, is better 
than 24h ECGS.
Duration? At rest? On exertion? Determine exercise tolerance (and any 
other reason for limitation, eg arthritis). NYHA classiﬁ cation (p135)? 
Worse when lying ﬂ at, how many pillows does the patient sleep with 
(orthopnoea)? Does the patient ever wake up in the night gasping for 
breath (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea), and how often? Any ankle 
swelling?
Dizziness is a loose term, so try to clarify if your patient means: did 
patient lose consciousness, and for how long (short duration suggests 
cardiac while longer duration suggests a neurological cause)? Any 
warning (pre-syncope)? What was patient doing at the time? Sudden/
gradual? Associated symptoms? Any residual symptoms, eg confusion? 
How long did it take for patient to return to ‘normal’? Tongue biting 
(pp460–1), seizure, incontinence? Witnessed? Memory loss pre/post 
event?
Vertigo (p462), the illusion of rotation of either the patient or their sur-
roundings ± diffi  culty walking/standing, patients may fall over.
Imbalance, a diffi  culty in walking straight but without vertigo, from 
peripheral nerve, posterior column, cerebellar, or other central pathway 
failure.
Faintness ie ‘light-headedness’, seen in anaemia, BP, postural hypoten-
sion, hypoglycaemia, carotid sinus hypersensitivity, and epilepsy.
SOCRATES? Foot/calf/thigh/buttock? ‘Claudication distance’, ie how 
long can patient walk before onset of pain? Rest pain?

Palpitations

Dyspnoea
(see p52, 
and p782)

Dizziness/ 
blackouts 
(see pp460–3)

Claudication

_OHCM_10e.indb   36

_OHCM_10e.indb   36

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Screen for presenting symptoms (table 2.3) before proceeding to past history:
Past history
Ask speciﬁ cally about: angina, any previous heart attack or stroke, rheumatic fe-
ver, diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, previous tests/procedures (ECG, 
angiograms,  angioplasty/stents,  echocardiogram,  cardiac  scintigraphy,  coronary 
artery bypass grafts (CABGS)).
Drug history
Particularly  note  aspirin/GTN/-blocker/diuretic/ACE-i/digoxin/statin/anticoagulant 
use.
Family history
Enquire speciﬁ cally if any 1st-degree relatives having cardiovascular events (espe-
cially if <60yrs).
Social history
Smoking, impact of symptoms on daily life, alcohol (clarify number of units), hob-
bies, exercise.

Ischaemic heart disease risk factors
  • Hypertension.
  • Smoking.
  • Diabetes mellitus.
  • Family history (1st-degree relative <60yrs old with IHD).
  • Hyperlipidaemia.

37

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

_OHCM_10e.indb   37

_OHCM_10e.indb   37

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
38

The cardiovascular system: examination 1

Introduce yourself, obtain consent to examine, and position the patient appropri-
ately: lying on a bed, sitting up at 45°. Expose them to the waist (for female patients, 
delay until examining the praecordium). Explain what you are doing throughout.

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

1  General inspection

  • Assess general state (ill/well)
  • Look for clues (oxygen, GTN spray)
  • Colour (pale, cyanosed, ﬂ ushed)
  • Short of breath?
  • Scars on chest wall (ﬁ g 2.3)?

2  Hands

  • Temperature: Capillary reﬁ ll time
  • Inspect:

Skin: tobacco staining, peripheral cyanosis 
(ﬁ g 2.4), tendon xanthomata, Janeway lesions, 
Osler's nodes (signs of infective endocarditis)
Nails: clubbing, splinter haemorrhages, nail bed 
pulsation (Quincke's sign of aortic regurgitation)

3  Radial and brachial pulses
  • Radial: Rate, rhythm; radio–radial delay (palpate 
pulse  bilaterally  simultaneously),  radiofemoral 
delay (palpate ipsilateral pulses simultaneously), 
collapsing  pulse  (identify  radial  pulse  (ﬁ g  2.5), 
then wrap your ﬁ ngers around wrist. Before el-
evating arm from the elbow check for pain in arm/
shoulder.  Lift  arm  straight  up:  collapsing  pulse, 
felt as ‘waterhammer’ pulsation.

  • Brachial: (Just medial to tendinous insertion of 

biceps.) Waveform character.

4  Blood pressure

  • Hyper- or hypotensive?
  • Pulse pressure (wide = aortic regurgitation, ar-
teriosclerosis, narrow = aortic stenosis, dry)

Fig 2.3  CABG scar.

Fig 2.4  Peripheral cyanosis.
Reproduced from Ball G, et al. (eds). 
Oxford Textbook of Vasculitis 
(2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 2.5  Radial pulse.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. 
(eds). Oxford Handbook of Clinical 
Examination and Practical Skills 
(2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

5  Neck
  • JVP: Ask patient to turn head to the left and look 
at the supraclavicular fossa (see ﬁ g 2.6 and p43). 
Comment on the height of the JVP and waveform. 
Press on the abdomen to check the abdomino-
jugular reﬂ ex.

  • Carotid pulse: inspect (visible carotid = Cor-

rigan's sign of aortic regurgitation), and palpate 
volume and character on one side then the other.

Fig 2.6  The JVP.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. 
(eds). Oxford Handbook of Clinical 
Examination and Practical Skills 
(2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   38

_OHCM_10e.indb   38

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
6  Face

  • Colour: Pale, ﬂ ushed, central cyanosis
  • Features: Corneal/senile arcus (ﬁ g 2.7), xanthe-

lasma (see ﬁ g 2.29, p60)

  • Pallor of the conjunctiva (anaemia)
  • Malar ﬂ ush (mitral stenosis)
  • Dental hygiene

7  The praecordium

Inspect:
  • Scars—midline sternotomy, lateral thoracotomy 

(mitral stenosis valvotomy).

Palpate:
  • Apex beat (lowermost lateral pulsation)—

usually 5th intercostal space in mid-clavicular 
line; measure position by counting intercostal 
spaces (sternal notch = 2nd intercostal space). 
Undisplaced/displaced? Character: impalpable 
(?dextrocardia/COPD), tapping (palpable S1), dou-
ble impulse, sustained/strong. Count rate if pulse 
irregular (AF, p130).

  • 'Heaves’ and ‘thrills’—place the heel of the hand 
ﬂ at on chest to left then right of sternum. Heave: 
sustained, thrusting usually felt at left sternal 
edge (= right ventricular enlargement). Thrill: 
palpable murmur felt as a vibration beneath your 
hand.

Auscultate: (palpate carotid pulse simultaneously)
  • Apex (mitral area)—listen with bell and dia-

phragm. Identify 1st and 2nd heart sounds: are 
they normal? Listen for added sounds (p44) and 
murmurs (p46); with the diaphragm listen for a 
pansystolic murmur radiating to the axilla—mitral 
regurgitation (see ﬁ g 2.8).

  • At apex with bell, ask the patient to ‘Roll over 

onto your left side, breathe out, and hold it there’ 
(a rumbling mid-diastolic murmur—mitral 
stenosis).

  • Lower left sternal edge (tricuspid area) and 
pulmonary area (left of manubrium in the 2nd 
intercostal space): if suspect right-sided mumur, 
listen with patient’s breath held in inspiration.
  • Right of manubrium in 2nd intercostal space 

(aortic area)—ejection systolic murmur radiating 
to the carotids—aortic stenosis.

  • Sit the patient up and listen at the lower left 

sternal edge with patient held in expiration (early 
diastolic murmur: aortic regurgitation?).

8  To complete the examination

  • Palpate for sacral and ankle oedema (ﬁ g 2.9).
  • Auscultate the lung bases for inspiratory crackles.
  • Examine the abdomen for a pulsatile liver and 

aortic aneurysm.

  • Check peripheral pulses, observation chart for 
temperature and O2, sats, dip urine, perform 
fundoscopy.

39

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig 2.7  Corneal arcus.

Fig 2.8  Praecordium/heart 
sounds.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. 
(eds). Oxford Handbook of Clinical 
Examination and Practical Skills 
(2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 2.9  Pitting oedema, apply 
ﬁ rm pressure for a few seconds.

_OHCM_10e.indb   39

_OHCM_10e.indb   39

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
40

The cardiovascular system: examination 2

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

General inspection Ill or well? In pain? Dyspnoeic? Are they pale, cold, and clammy? 
Can you hear the click of a prosthetic valve? Inspect for scars: median sternotomy 
(CABG; valve replacement; congenital heart disease). Inspect for any pacemakers/
internal cardiac deﬁ brillators (ICDS). Look around the bed for oxygen and GTN spray.
Hands Finger clubbing occurs in congenital cyanotic heart disease and endocardi-
tis. Splinter haemorrhages, Osler’s nodes (tender nodules, eg in ﬁ nger pulps) and 
Janeway lesions (red macules on palms, ﬁ g 3.38, p151) are signs of infective endocar-
ditis. If found, examine the fundi for Roth’s spots (retinal infarcts, p560). Are there 
nail fold infarcts (vasculitis, p556) or nailbed capillary pulsation (Quincke’s sign in 
aortic regurgitation)? Is there arachnodactyly (Marfan’s) or polydactyly (ASD)? Are 
there tendon xanthomata (see BOX ‘Hyperlipidaemia’)?
Pulse See p42. Feel for radio-femoral delay (coarctation of the aorta) and radio-
radial delay (eg from aortic arch aneurysm).
Blood pressure (see BOX ‘An unusual BP measurement’) Systolic BP is the pressure at 
which the pulse is ﬁ rst heard as on cuff  deﬂ ation (Korotkoff  sounds); the diastolic is when 
the heart sounds disappear or become muffl  ed (eg in the young). The pulse pressure is 
the diff erence between systolic and diastolic pressures. It is narrow in aortic stenosis and 
hypovolaemia, and wide in aortic regurgitation, arteriosclerosis, and septic shock. Deﬁ n-
ing hypertension: see p138. Examine the fundi for hypertensive changes (p138). Shock may 
occur if systolic <90mmHg (p790). Postural hypotension is deﬁ ned as a drop in systolic 
>20mmHg or diastolic >10mmHg on standing for 3–5 min (see BOX ‘Postural hypotension’).
Carotid pulse (See p42.)
Jugular venous pressure (See p43.)
Face Is there corneal arcus (ﬁ g 2.7, p39) or xanthelasma (ﬁ g 2.29, p60, signifying 
dyslipidaemia, p690)? Is there a malar ﬂ ush (mitral stenosis, low cardiac output)? 
Are there signs of Graves’ disease, eg bulging eyes (exophthalmos) or goitre—p218)? 
Is the face dysmorphic, eg Down’s syndrome, Marfan’s syndrome (p706)—or Turner’s, 
Noonan’s, or Williams syndromes (p149)?
Praecordium  Palpate  the  apex  beat.  Normal  position:  5th  intercostal  space  in 
the mid-clavicular line. Is it displaced laterally? Is it abnormal in nature: heaving 
(caused by outﬂ ow obstruction, eg aortic stenosis or systemic hypertension), thrust-
ing (caused by volume overload, eg mitral or aortic incompetence), tapping (mitral 
stenosis, essentially a palpable 1st heart sound), diffuse (LV failure, dilated cardio-
myopathy)  or  double  impulse  (H(O)CM,  p152)?  Is  there  dextrocardia?  Feel  for  left 
parasternal heave (RV enlargement, eg in pulmonary stenosis, cor pulmonale, ASD) 
or thrills (transmitted murmurs).
Auscultating the heart Also auscultate for bruits over the carotids and elsewhere, 
particularly if there is inequality between pulses or absence of a pulse. Causes: ath-
erosclerosis (elderly), vasculitis (young, p556).
Lungs Examine the bases for creps & pleural eff usions, indicative of cardiac failure.
Oedema Examine the ankles, legs, sacrum, and torso for pitting oedema. (You may 
prefer to examine ankles while standing at the foot of the bed as it is a good early 
clue that there may be further pathology to be found.)
Abdomen Hepatomegaly and ascites in right-sided heart failure; pulsatile hepato-
megaly with tricuspid regurgitation; splenomegaly with infective endocarditis.
Fundoscopy Roth spots (infective endocarditis).
Urine dipstick Haematuria.

Presenting your ﬁ ndings
1      Signs of heart failure?
2      Clinical evidence of infective endocarditis?
3      Sinus/abnormal rhythm?
4      Heart sounds normal, abnormal, or additional?
5      Murmurs?

_OHCM_10e.indb   40

_OHCM_10e.indb   40

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
41

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

An unusual BP measurement
Don’t interpret a BP value in isolation (p138). We cannot diagnose hypertension 
(or hypotension) on one BP reading. Take into account pain, the ‘white coat’ eff ect 
(BP higher in a medical setting), and equipment. Getting cuff  size right is vital. 
Optimal cuff width is 40% of the arm circumference. If you suspect a BP read-
ing to be anomalous, check the equipment and review the observation chart for 
previous readings and other vital signs. Consider taking a manual reading with a 
diff erent set yourself.

Often a quiet chat will bring the BP down (yours and your patient’s: keep your 
ears open, and the patient may reveal some new tangential but vital fact that the 
offi  cial history glossed over). Many things aff ect  BP readings from background 
noise to how much you touch the patient. If BP, eg 150/90, check both arms. If 
the systolic diff erence is >20mmHg, consider peripheral vascular disease, and if 
the patient could have a thoracic aortic aneurysm or co arctation (rare). NB: right 
arm diastolic is normally 2.4–5mmHg higher than left.

Postural hypotension
This is an important cause of falls and faints in the elderly. It is deﬁ ned as a drop 
in systolic BP >20mmHg or diastolic >10mmHg after standing for 3min vs lying.
Causes:  Hypo volaemia  (early  sign);  drugs,  eg  nitrates,  diuretics,  antihyperten-
sives, antipsychotics; Addison’s (p226); hypopituitarism (ACTH); autonomic neu-
ropathy (p505, DM, multisystem atrophy, p494); after a marathon run (peripheral 
resistance is low for some hours); idiopathic.
Treatment:
  • Lie down if feeling faint.
  • Stand slowly (with escape route: don’t move away from the chair too soon!).
  • Consider referral to a ‘falls clinic’, where special equipment is available for moni-

toring patient under various tilts.

  • Manage autonomic neuropathy, p505.
  • Water and salt ingestion can help (eg 150mmol Na+/d), but Na+ has its problems.
  • Physical measures: leg crossing, squatting, elas tic compression stockings (check 

dorsalis pedis pulse is present), and careful exercise may help.

  • If post-prandial dizziness, eat little and often; carbohydrate and alcohol intake.
  • Head-up tilt of the bed at night renin release, so ﬂ uid loss and standing BP.
  • 1st-line drugs: ﬂ udrocortisone (retains ﬂ uid) 50mcg/d; go up to 300mcg/24h PO 
only if tolerated. Monitor weight; beware if CCF, renal impairment, or albumin as 
ﬂ udrocortisone worsens oedema.

  • 2nd-line drugs: sympathomimetics, eg midodrine (not always available) or ephed-

rine; pyridostigmine (eg if detrusor under-activity too).

  • If these fail, turn things on their head and ask: is this really supine hypertension?

Hyperlipidaemia
Xanthomata are localized deposits of fat under the skin, occurring over joints, 
tendons, hands, and feet. Xanthel asma refers to xanthoma on the eyelid (p691,
ﬁ g 14.13). Corneal arcus (ﬁ g 2.7, p39) is a crescentic-shaped opacity at the periph-
ery of the cornea. Common in those over 60yrs, can be normal, but may represent 
hyperlipidaemia, especially in those under this age.

Top tips
The hand can be used as a manometer to estimate JVP/CVP if you cannot see the neck 
properly (eg central line in situ). Hold the hand palm down below the level of the 
heart until the veins dilate (patient must be warm!), then lift slowly, keeping the arm 
horizontal. The veins should empty as the hand is raised. Empty veins below the level 
of the heart suggests a low CVP, if they remain full it suggests a normal/high CVP.

_OHCM_10e.indb   41

_OHCM_10e.indb   41

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
42

Pulses

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Assess the radial pulse to determine rate and rhythm. Character and volume are 
best assessed at the brachial or carotid arteries. A collapsing pulse may also be felt 
at the radial artery when the patient’s arm is elevated above their head. See ﬁ g 2.10.
Rate Is the pulse fast (100bpm, p126) or slow (60bpm, p124)?
Rhythm An irregularly irregular pulse occurs in AF or multiple ectopics. A regularly 
irregular pulse occurs in 2° heart block and ventricular bigeminus.
Character and volume
  • Bounding pulses are caused by CO2 retention, liver failure, and sepsis.
  • Small volume pulses occur in aortic stenosis, shock, and pericardial eff usion.
  • Collapsing (‘waterhammer’) pulses are caused by aortic incompetence, AV mal-

formations, and a patent ductus arteriosus.

  • Anacrotic (slow-rising) pulses occur in aortic stenosis.
  • Bisferiens pulses occur in combined aortic stenosis and regurgitation.
  • Pulsus  alternans  (alternating  strong  and  weak  beats)  suggests  LVF,  cardio-

myopathy, or aortic stenosis.
  • Jerky pulses occur in H(O)CM.
  • Pulsus paradoxus (systolic pressure weakens in inspiration by >10mmHg) occurs 

in severe asthma, pericardial constriction, or cardiac tamponade.

Peripheral pulses (See p36.) See p771 for arterial blood gas (ABG) sampling.

Waterhammer pulse
The waterhammer was a popular toy that consisted of a vacuum tube half-ﬁ lled 
with water. On inversion, the whoosh of water produced an intriguing hammer-
blow as it rushed from end to end. This is the alternative name for Corrigan’s 
collapsing pulse—ie one in which the upstroke is abrupt and steep, whose peak 
is reached early and with abnormal force—before a rapid downstroke (as blood 
whooshes back into the left ventricle through an incompetent aortic valve).

Fig 2.10  Arterial pulse waveforms.
Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. (eds). Oxford Handbook of Clinical Examina-
tion and Practical Skills (2014), with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   42

_OHCM_10e.indb   42

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
43

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The jugular venous pressure (JVP)

Facial vein

Maxillary vein

Thyroid
cartilage

Internal
jugular vein

External
jugular vein

Posterior
auricular vein

Superﬁcial
temporal vein

Retromandibular
vein

The internal jugular vein acts as a capricious manometer of right atrial pressure. Ob-
serve the height and the waveform of the pulse. JVP observations are often diffi  cult. 
so do not be downhearted if the skill seems to elude you. Examine necks, and the 
patterns you see may slowly 
start  to  make  sense—see 
ﬁ g 2.11 for the local venous 
anatomy. 
Concomitantly 
palpate the arterial pulse to 
help decipher patterns.
The height
Observe the patient at 45°, 
with  their  head  turned 
slightly to the left and neck 
relaxed.  Good  lighting  and 
correct positioning are key. 
Look  for  the  right  internal 
jugular vein as it passes just medial to the clavicular head of the sterno cleidomastoid 
up behind the angle of the jaw to the earlobes. The JVP is assessed by measuring the 
vertical height from the manubriosternal angle (not the sternal notch) to the top of 
the pulse. Pressure at zero (at the sternal angle) is 5cm, so add the height of the JVP 
with 5cm to obtain the right heart ﬁ lling pressure in cm of water. A pressure above 
9cm (4cm above the sternal angle at 45°) is elevated.
Is the pulse venous (and not arterial)?
  • Usually impalpable, and obliterated by ﬁ nger pressure on the vessel.
  • Rises transiently with pressure on abdomen (abdominojugular reﬂ ux)2 or on liver 
(hepatojug ular reﬂ ux), and alters with posture and respiration (disappears when 
patient sits from lying ﬂ at).

Fig 2.11  The jugular venous system.

Anterior
jugular vein

  • Usually has a double pulse for every arterial pulse. See ﬁ g 2.12.
Abnormalities of the JVP
  • Raised JVP with normal waveform: Fluid overload, right heart failure.
  • Fixed raised JVP with absent pulsation: SVC obstruction (p528).
  • Large a wave: Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary stenosis.
  • Cannon a wave: When the right atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve, 
large ‘cannon’ a waves result. Causes—complete heart block, single chamber ven-
tricular pacing, ventricular arrhythmias/ectopics.

  • Absent a wave: Atrial ﬁ brillation.
  • Large v waves: Tricuspid regurgitation—look for earlobe movement.
  • Constrictive pericarditis: High plateau of JVP (which rises on inspiration—Kuss-

maul’s sign) with deep x and y descents.

  • Absent JVP: When lying ﬂ at, the jugular vein should be ﬁ lled. If there is reduced 

circulatory volume (eg dehydration, haemorrhage) the JVP may be absent.

Fig 2.12  The jugular venous pressure wave. The JVP drops as the X descent during 
ventricular systole because the right atrium is no longer contracting. This means 
that the pressure in the right atrium is dropping and this is reﬂ ected by the JVP.
After Clinical Examination, Macleod, Churchill and Aids to Undergraduate Medicine, J Burton, Churchill.

2  This sign was ﬁ rst described by Pasteur in 1885 in the context of tricuspid incompetence.

_OHCM_10e.indb   43

_OHCM_10e.indb   43

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
44

The heart sounds

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Listen systematically: sounds then murmurs. While listening, palpate the carotid 
artery: S1 is synchronous with the upstroke.
Heart sounds See ﬁ g 2.13. The 1st and 2nd sounds are usually clear. Conﬁ dent pro-
nouncements about other sounds and soft murmurs may be diffi  cult. Even senior 
colleagues disagree with one another about the more diffi  cult sounds and murmurs.
The 1st heart sound (S1) Represents closure of mitral (M1) and tricuspid (T1) valves. 
Splitting in inspiration may be heard and is normal.
  • Loud S1 In mitral stenosis, because the narrowed valve oriﬁ ce limits ventricular 
ﬁ lling, there is no gradual decrease in ﬂ ow towards the end of diastole. The valves 
are, therefore, at their maximum excursion at the end of diastole, and so shut rap-
idly leading to a loud S1 (the ‘tapping’ apex). S1 is also loud if diastolic ﬁ lling time is 
shortened, eg if the PR interval is short, and in tachycardia.

  • Soft S1 occurs if the diastolic ﬁ lling time is prolonged, eg prolonged PR interval, or if 

the mitral valve leaﬂ ets fail to close properly (ie mitral incompetence).

The intensity of S1 is variable in AV block, AF, and nodal or ventricular tachycardia.
The 2nd heart sound (S2) Represents aortic (A2) and pulmonary valve (P2) closure. 
The most important abnormality of A2 is softening in aortic stenosis.
  • A2 is said to be loud in tachycardia, hypertension, and transposition, but this is 

probably not a useful clinical entity.

  • P2 is loud in pulmonary hypertension and soft in pulmonary stenosis.
  • Splitting of S2 in inspiration is normal and is mainly due to the variation of right 

heart venous return with respiration, delaying the pulmonary component.

  • Wide splitting occurs in right bundle branch block (BBB), pulmonary stenosis, 

deep inspiration, mitral regurgitation, and VSD.

  • Wide ﬁ xed splitting occurs in atrial septal defect (ASD).
  • Reversed splitting (ie A2 following P2, with splitting increasing on expiration) 
occurs in left bundle branch block, aortic stenosis, PDA (patent ductus arterio-
sus), and right ventricular pacing.

  • A single S2 occurs in Fallot’s tetralogy, severe aortic or pulmonary stenosis, 
pulmonary atresia, Eisenmenger’s syndrome (p156), large VSD, or hypertension.

NB: splitting and P2 are heard best in the pulmonary area.
Additional sounds
3rd heart sound (S3) may occur just after S2. It is low pitched and best heard with the 
bell of the stethoscope. S3 is pathological over the age of 30yrs. A loud S3 occurs in a 
dilated left ventricle with rapid ventricular ﬁ lling (mitral regurgitation, VSD) or poor LV 
function (post MI, dilated cardiomyopathy). In constrictive pericarditis or restrictive 
cardiomyopathy it occurs early and is more high pitched (‘pericardial knock’).
4th heart sound (S4) occurs just before S1. Always abnormal, it represents atrial 
contraction against a ventricle made stiff  by any cause, eg aortic stenosis or hyper-
tensive heart disease.
Triple and gallop rhythms A 3rd or 4th heart sound occurring with a sinus tachycar-
dia may give the impression of galloping hooves. An S3 gallop has the same rhythm 
as ‘Ken-tucky’, whereas an S4 gallop has the same rhythm as ‘Tenne-ssee’. When S3 
and S4 occur in a tachycardia, eg with pulmonary embolism, they may summate and 
appear as a single sound, a summation gallop.
An ejection systolic click is heard early in systole with bicuspid aortic valves, and if 
BP. The right heart equivalent lesions may also cause clicks.
Mid-systolic clicks occur in mitral valve prolapse (p144).
An opening snap precedes the mid-diastolic murmur of mitral (and tricuspid) steno-
sis. It indicates a pliable (non-calciﬁ ed) valve.
Prosthetic sounds are caused by non-biological valves, on opening and closing: rum-
bling sounds ≈ ball and cage valves (eg Starr–Edwards); single clicks ≈ tilting disc 
valve (eg single disc: Bjork Shiley; bileaﬂ et: St Jude—often quieter). Prosthetic mitral 
valve clicks occur in time with S1, aortic valve clicks in time with S2.

_OHCM_10e.indb   44

_OHCM_10e.indb   44

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
45

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig 2.13  The cardiac cycle. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   45

_OHCM_10e.indb   45

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
46

Cardiac murmurs

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Always consider other symptoms and signs before auscultation and think: ‘What 
do I expect to hear?’ But don’t let your expectations determine what you hear.
Use  the  stethoscope  correctly:  remember  that  the  bell  is  good  for  low-pitched 
sounds (eg mitral stenosis) and should be applied gently. The diaphragm ﬁ lters out 
low pitches, making higher-pitched murmurs easier to detect (eg aortic regurgita-
tion). NB: a bell applied tightly to the skin becomes a diaphragm.
Consider any murmur in terms of character, timing, loudness, area where loudest, 
radiation, and accentuating manoeuvres.
When in doubt, rely on echocardiography rather than disputed sounds. (But still 
enjoy trying to ﬁ gure out the clinical conundrum!)
Character and timing (See ﬁ g 2.14.)
  • An  ejection-systolic  murmur  (ESM,  crescendo–decrescendo)  usually  originates 
from the outﬂ ow tract and waxes and wanes with the intraventricular pressures. 
ESMS  may  be  innocent  and  are  common  in  children  and  high-output  states  (eg 
tachycardia, pregnancy). Organic causes include aortic stenosis and sclerosis, pul-
monary stenosis, and H(O)CM.

  • A pansystolic murmur (PSM) is of uniform intensity and merges with S2. It is usu-
ally organic and occurs in mitral or tricuspid regurgitation (S1 may also be soft in 
these), or a ventricular septal defect (p156). Mitral valve prolapse may produce a 
late systolic murmur ± midsystolic click.

  • Early diastolic murmurs (EDMs) are high pitched and easily missed: listen for the 
‘absence of silence’ in early diastole. An EDM occurs in aortic and, though rare, pul-
monary regurgitation. If the pulmonary regurgitation is secondary to pulmonary 
hypertension resulting from mitral stenosis, then the EDM is called a Graham Steell 
murmur.

  • Mid-diastolic murmurs (MDMs) are low pitched and rumbling. They occur in mitral 
stenosis (accentuated presystolically if heart still in sinus rhythm), rheumatic fever 
(Carey Coombs’ murmur: due to thickening of the mitral valve leaﬂ ets), and aortic 
regurgitation  (Austin  Flint  murmur:  due  to  the  ﬂ uttering  of  the  anterior  mitral 
valve cusp caused by the regurgitant stream).

Intensity All murmurs are graded on a scale of 1–6 (see table 2.4), though in practice 
diastolic murmurs, being less loud, are only graded 1–4. Intensity is a poor guide to 
the severity of a lesion—an ESM may be inaudible in severe aortic stenosis.
Area where loudest Though an unreliable sign, mitral murmurs tend to be loudest 
over the apex, in contrast to the area of greatest intensity from lesions of the aortic 
(right 2nd intercostal space), pulmonary (left 2nd intercostal space), and tricuspid 
(lower left sternal edge) valves.
Radiation The ESM of aortic stenosis classically radiates to the carotids, in contrast 
to the PSM of mitral regurgitation, which radiates to the axilla.
Accentuating manoeuvres
  • Movements that bring the relevant part of the heart closer to the stethoscope ac-
centuate murmurs (eg leaning forward for aortic regurgitation, left lateral position 
for mitral stenosis).

  • Expiration increases blood ﬂ ow to the left side of the heart and therefore accentu-

ates left-sided murmurs. Inspiration has the opposite eff ect.

  • Valsalva manoeuvre (forced expiration against a closed glottis) decreases sys-
temic venous return, accentuating mitral valve prolapse and H(O)CM, but softening 
mitral regurgitation and aortic stenosis. Squatting has exactly the opposite eff ect. 
Exercise accentuates the murmur of mitral stenosis.

Non-valvular murmurs A pericardial friction rub may be heard in pericarditis. 
It is a superﬁ cial scratching sound, not conﬁ ned to systole or diastole. Continuous 
murmurs are present throughout the cardiac cycle and may occur with a patent 
ductus arteriosus, arteriovenous ﬁ stula, or ruptured sinus of Valsalva.

_OHCM_10e.indb   46

_OHCM_10e.indb   46

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
47

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig 2.14  Typical waveforms of common heart murmurs.

Grading intensity of heart murmurs
The following grading is commonly used for murmurs—systolic murmurs from 1 
to 6 and diastolic murmurs from 1 to 4, never being clinically >4/6.
Table 2.4  Grading of heart murmurs.

Grade
1/6
2/6
3/6
4/6
5/6
6/6

Description
Very soft, only heard after listening for a while
Soft, but detectable immediately
Clearly audible, but no thrill palpable
Clearly audible, palpable thrill
Audible with stethoscope only partially touching chest
Can be heard without placing stethoscope on chest

Prosthetic valve murmurs
Prosthetic valves: Created either from synthetic material (mechanical prosthesis) 
or from biological tissue (bioprosthesis). The choice of prosthesis is determined by 
the anticipated longevity of the patient and the patient’s ability to tolerate antico-
agulation. Three mechanical valve designs exist: the caged ball valve, the tilting disc 
(single leaﬂ et) valve, and the bileaﬂ et valve. Tissue valves are made from porcine 
valves or bovine pericardium.
Prosthetic aortic valves: All types produce a degree of outﬂ ow obstruction and 
thus have an ESM. The intensity of this murmur increases as the valve fails. Ball and 
cage valves (eg Starr–Edwards) and tissue valves do close completely in diastole 
and so any diastolic murmur implies valve failure.
Prosthetic mitral valves: Ball and cage valves project into the left ventricle and 
can cause a low-intensity ESM as they interfere with the ejected stream. Tissue 
valves and bileaﬂ et valves can have a low-intensity diastolic murmur. Consider 
any systolic murmur of loud intensity to be a sign of regurgitation and  failure.

Eponymous signs of aortic regurgitation
  • de Musset’s sign—head nodding in time with the pulse.
  • Müller’s sign—systolic pulsations of the uvula.
  • Corrigan’s sign—visible carotid pulsations.
  • Quincke’s sign—capillary nailbed pulsation in the ﬁ ngers.
  • Traube’s sign—‘pistol shot’ femorals, a booming sound heard over the femorals.
  • Duroziez’s sign—to and fro diastolic murmur heard when compressing the femo-

rals proximally with the stethoscope.

_OHCM_10e.indb   47

_OHCM_10e.indb   47

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
48

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Direct questions

Duration? Character (eg barking/hollow/dry)? Nocturnal (≈asthma, 
ask about other atopic symptoms, ie eczema, hay fever)? Exacerbat-
ing factors? Sputum (colour? How much?). Any blood/haemoptysis?

Always think about TB (recent foreign travel?) and mal ignancy 
(weight loss?). Mixed with sputum? (Blood not mixed with sputum 
suggests pulmonary embolism, trauma, or bleeding into a lung cav-
ity. ) Melaena? (Occurs if enough coughed-up blood is swallowed.)

Duration? Steps climbed/distance walked before onset? NYHA clas-
siﬁ cation (p135)? Diurnal variation (≈asthma)?
Ask speciﬁ cally about circumstances in which dyspnoea occurs (eg 
occupational allergen exposure).
Eg due to laryngitis, recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, Singer’s 
nodules, or laryngeal tumour.

The respiratory system: history
Table 2.5  Presenting symptoms and questions to ask
Presenting 
symptoms
Cough
(see BOX ‘Charac-
teristic coughs’)
Haemoptysis
(see table 2.6 and 
BOX ‘Haemop-
tysis’)
Dyspnoea
(see table 2.7 and 
BOX ‘Dyspnoea’ 
and p782)
Hoarseness
(OHCS p568)
Wheeze (p52)
Fever/night 
sweats (p29)
Chest pain
(p94 & p784)
Stridor (see BOX 
‘Stridor’)
History Ask about current symptoms (table 2.5) and past history: pneumonia/bron-
chitis; TB; atopy3 (asthma/eczema/hay fever); previous CXR abnormalities; lung surgery; 
myopathy; neurological disorders. Connective tissue disorders, eg rheumatoid, SLE.
Drug history Respiratory drugs (eg steroids, bronchodilators)? Any other drugs, esp -
ecially with respiratory SE (eg ACE inhibitors, cytotoxics, -blockers, amiodarone)?
Family history Atopy? 3 Emphysema? TB?
Social history Quantify smoking in ‘pack-years’ (20 cigarettes/day for 1 year = 1 
pack-year). Occupational exposure (farming, mining, asbestos) has possible compen-
satory implications. Pets at home (eg birds)? Recent travel/TB contacts?
Stridor
Inspiratory sound due to partial obstruction of upper airways. Obstruction may 
be due to something within the lumen (eg foreign body, tumour, bilateral vocal 
cord palsy), within the wall (eg oedema from anaphylaxis, laryngospasm, tumour, 
croup, acute epiglottitis, amyloidosis), or extrinsic (eg goitre, oesophagus, lymph-
adenopathy, post-op stridor, after neck surgery). It’s an emerg ency (p772) if gas 
exchange is compromised. NB: wheeze is an expiratory sound.

SOCRATES (see p36), usually ‘pleuritic’ if respiratory (ie worse on 
inspiration?).

Characteristic coughs

Coughing is relatively non-speciﬁ c, resulting from irritation anywhere from the 
pharynx to the lungs. The character of a cough may, however, give clues as to the 
underlying cause:
  • Loud, brassy coughing suggests pressure on the trachea, eg by a tumour.
  • Hollow, ‘bovine’ coughing is associated with recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy.
  • Barking coughs occur in croup.
  • Chronic cough Think of pertussis, TB, foreign body, asthma (eg nocturnal).
  • Dry, chronic coughing may occur following acid irritation of the lungs in oe-

sophageal reﬂ ux, and as a side-eff ect of ACE inhibitors.

Do not ignore a change in character of a chronic cough; it may signify a new 
problem, eg infection, malignancy.

3  Atopy implies predisposition to, or concurrence of, asthma, hay fever and eczema with production of 
speciﬁ c IgE on exposure to common allergens (eg house dust mite, grass, cats).

_OHCM_10e.indb   48

_OHCM_10e.indb   48

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Haemoptysis
Blood  is  coughed  up,  eg  frothy,  alkaline,  and  bright  red,  often  in  a  context  of 
known chest disease (vomited blood is acidic and dark).
Table 2.6  Respiratory causes of haemoptysis.
1 Infective

2 Neoplastic
3 Vascular

4 Parenchymal

TB; bronchiectasis; bronchitis; pneumonia; lung abscess; 
COPD; fungi (eg aspergillosis); viruses (from pneumonitis, 
cryo globulinaemia, eg with hepatitis viruses, HIV-associ-
ated pneumocystosis, or MAI, p400). Helminths: paragon-
imiasis; hydatid (p435); schistosomiasis.
Primary or secondary.
Lung infarction (PE); vasculitis (ANCA-associated; RA; SLE); 
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia; AV malforma-
tion; capillaritis.
Diff use interstitial ﬁ brosis; sarcoidosis; haemosid erosis; 
Goodpasture’s syndrome; cystic ﬁ brosis.
Idiopathic, thromboembolic, congenital cyanotic heart 
disease (p156), pulmonary ﬁ brosis, bronchiectasis.
Any—eg thrombocytopenia, p344; DIC; warfarin excess.
Eg post-intubation, or an eroding implanted deﬁ brillator.

5 Pulmonary 
hypertension
6 Coagulopathies
7 Trauma/foreign body
8 Pseudo-haemoptysis Munchausen’s (p706); aspirated haematemesis; red pig ment 

49

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

(prodigiosin) from Serratia marcescens (Gram-negative 
bacteria) in sputum.7

Rare causes refuse to be classiﬁ ed neatly: vascular causes may have infective origins, 
eg hydatid cyst may count as a foreign body, and infection, and vascular if it ﬁ stulates 
with the aorta; ditto for infected (mycotic) aneurysm rupture, or TB aortitis. Infective 
causes entailing coag ulopathy: dengue; leptospirosis. In monthly haemoptysis, think 
of lung endometriosis.
:  Haemoptysis  may  need  treating  in  its  own  right,  if  mass ive  (eg  trauma,  TB, 
hydatid cyst, cancer, AV malformation): call chest team, consider interventional 
radiology input (danger is drowning: lobe resection, endobronchial tamponade, or 
arterial embolization may be needed). Set up IVI, do CXR, blood gases, FBC, INR/APTT, 
crossmatch. If distressing, give prompt IV morphine, eg if inoperable malignancy.

Dyspnoea

Subjective sensation of shortness of breath, often exacerbated by exertion.
  • Lung—airway  and  interstitial  disease.  May  be  hard  to  separate  from  cardiac 
causes; asthma may wake patient, and cause early morning dyspnoea & wheeze.
  • Cardiac—eg ischaemic heart disease or left ventricular failure (LVF), mitral ste-
nosis, of any cause. LVF is associated with orthopnoea (dyspnoea worse on lying; 
‘How many pillows?’) and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (PND; dyspnoea waking 
one up). Other features include ankle oedema, lung crepitations, and JVP.

  • Anatomical—eg diseases of the chest wall, muscles, pleura. Ascites can cause 

breathlessness by splinting the diaphragm, restricting its movement.

  • Others Any shocked patient may also be dyspnoeic (p790 & p607)—dyspnoea 
may be shock’s presenting feature. Also anaemia or metabolic acidosis caus-
ing respiratory compensation, eg ketoacidosis, aspirin poisoning. Look for other 
clues—dyspnoea at rest unassociated with exertion, may be psychogenic: pro-
longed hyperventilation causes respiratory alkalosis. This causes a fall in ion ized 
calcium  leading  to  apparent  hypocalcaemia.  Features  include  peripheral  and 
perioral paraesthesiae ± carpopedal spasm. Speed of onset helps diagnosis:

Table 2.7  Aetiology of dyspnoea by timing of onset.

Acute
Foreign body
Pneumothorax (p749, ﬁ g 16.43)
Pulmonary embolus
Acute pulmonary oedema
Psychogenic

Subacute
Asthma
Parenchymal disease,
  eg alveolitis pneumonia
Eff usion
Psychogenic

Chronic
COPD and chronic parenchymal 
  diseases
Non-respiratory causes,
  eg cardiac failure, 
  anaemia

_OHCM_10e.indb   49

_OHCM_10e.indb   49

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
50

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The respiratory system: examination 1
Begin by introducing yourself, obtaining consent to examine and position the patient 
appropriately: lying on a bed, sitting up at 45°. Expose them to the waist (for female 
patients, delay until examining the chest). Explain what you are doing throughout.

1  General inspection

  • Assess general state (ill/well/cachexic)
  • Look for clues (oxygen, inhalers, nebulizers, venturi 

mask)

  • Colour (pale, cyanosed (ﬁ g 2.15), ﬂ ushed)
  • Short of breath? Accessory muscle use?
  • Scars on chest wall?
Ask the patient to take a deep breath in, watch chest 
movement and symmetry, any coughing?

  • Inspect:

2  Hands

Tobacco  staining  (ﬁ g  2.16),  peripheral  cyanosis, 
clubbing, signs of systemic disease (systemic scle-
rosis, rheumatoid arthritis)

  • Asterixis:

Fig 2.15  Cyanosis.

Ask the patient to hold their hands out and cock 
their wrists back

Fig 2.16  Tar stains.

3  Arms

  • Time pulse rate, with ﬁ ngers still on the pulse, 

check respiratory rate (this can increase if the pa-
tient is aware you are timing it)—and pattern (p53)

  • Bounding pulse (CO2 retention)?
  • Check blood pressure

4  Neck
  • Trachea: Feel in sternal notch (ﬁ g 2.17, deviated?), 
assess cricosternal distance in ﬁ nger-breadths and 
feel for tracheal tug

  • Lymphadenopathy: From behind with patient sat 

forward palpate lymph nodes of head and neck

  • JVP:  Raised  in  cor  pulmonale,  ﬁ xed  and  raised  in 

superior vena cava obstruction

5  Face
  • Inspect: For signs of Horner’s (ﬁ g 2.18), conjuncti-

val pallor, central cyanosis (ask patient to stick out 
tongue), pursed lip breathing

Fig 2.17  Sternal notch.

Reproduced from Thomas et al. 
(eds), Oxford Handbook of Clini-
cal Examination and Practical 
Skills (2014) with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig 2.18  Horner’s syndrome.

_OHCM_10e.indb   50

_OHCM_10e.indb   50

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
6  Front of chest

  • Apex beat.
  • Expansion: Ask patient to ‘breathe all the way out’, 
place hands as in ﬁ g 2.19, ‘now a deep breath in’, 
and note distance of thumbs to midline, is expan-
sion equal? Repeat with hands laid on upper chest.
  • Tactile vocal fremitus: Palpate the chest wall with 
your  ﬁ ngertips  and  ask  the  patient  to  repeat  ‘99’, 
each time they feel your hand, comparing right to 
left. This is rarely used.

  • Percussion: Percuss over diff erent respiratory seg-
ments, comparing right and left (see ﬁ g 2.21, p53).
  • Auscultation: Ask patient to ‘take steady breaths 
in  and  out  through  your  mouth’  and  listen  with 
diaphragm from apices to bases, comparing right 
and left (see table 2.8, p52).

  • Vocal resonance: Repeat auscultation, asking pa-
tient to repeat ‘99’ each time they feel the stetho-
scope.  If  marked  resonance  heard,  repeat  with 
asking patient to whisper ‘99’; if clearly heard this 
is termed ‘whispering pectoriloquy’ and is a sensi-
tive sign for consolidation. Outside of exams, the 
choice of vocal resonance or tactile vocal fremitus 
is a personal preference. Many clinicians prefer vo-
cal resonance as it provides more information than 
tactile vocal fremitus.

7  Back of chest

  • Expansion
  • Tactile vocal fremitus
  • Percussion
  • Auscultation
  • Vocal resonance

8  To complete the examination

  • Palpate for sacral and ankle oedema (ﬁ g 2.20)
  • Check peripheral pulses, observation chart for 

temperature and O2 sats

  • Examine the sputum pot and check PEFR

51

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig  2.19  Placement  of  the 
hands for testing chest expan-
sion:  anchor  with  the  ﬁ ngers 
and  leave  the  thumbs  free-
ﬂ oating.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et 
al., Oxford Handbook of Clinical 
Examination and Practical Skills 
(2014) with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig 2.20  Ankle oedema.

Top tips
  • Whispering pectoriloquy is a classic and speciﬁ c sign of consolidation.
  • If you don’t adequately expose the chest you may miss small scars, eg from 

video thoracoscopy.

  • If you see Horner’s syndrome, check for wasting of the small muscles of the hand; 

see p702 and p708.

_OHCM_10e.indb   51

_OHCM_10e.indb   51

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
52

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The respiratory system: examination 2
General inspection ‘Comfortable at rest’ or unwell? Cachectic? Respiratory dis-
tress? (if high negative intrathoracic pressures are needed to generate air entry). 
Stridor? Respiratory rate, breathing pattern (see BOX ‘Breathing patterns’). Look for 
chest wall and spine deformities (see p55). Inspect for scars of past surgery, chest 
drains, or radiotherapy (skin thickening, tattoos for radiotherapy). Chest wall move-
ment: symmetrical? (if not, pathology on restricted side). Paradoxical respiration? 
(abdomen sucked in with inspiration; seen in diaphragmatic paralysis, see p502).
Hands Clubbing, peripheral cyanosis, tar stains, ﬁ ne tremor (-agonist use), wast-
ing of in trinsic muscles (T1 lesions, eg Pancoast’s tumour, p708). Tender wrists (hy-
pertrophic pulmonary osteo arthropathy—cancer). Aster ixis (CO2 retention). Pulse: 
paradoxical (respiratory distress), bounding (CO2 retention).
Face Ptosis and constricted pupil (Horner’s syndrome, eg Pancoast’s tumour, p708)? 
Bluish tongue and lips (central cyanosis, p34)? Conjunctival pallor (anaemia)?
Neck Trachea: Central or displaced? (towards collapse or away from large pleural 
eff usion/tension pneumothorax; slight deviation to right is normal). Cricosternal dis-
tance <3cm is hyperexpansion. Tracheal tug: descent of trachea with inspiration (se-
vere airﬂ ow limitation). Lymphadenopathy: TB/Ca? JVP:  in cor pulmonale.
Palpation  Apex  beat:  Impalpable?  (COPD/pleural  eff usion/dextrocardia?)  Ex-
pansion:  <5cm  on  deep  inspiration  is  abnormal.  Symmetry?  Tactile  vocal
fremitus:  implies consolidation.
Percussion Dull percussion note: Collapse, consolidation, ﬁ brosis, pleural thicken-
ing, or pleural eff usion (‘stony dull’). Cardiac dullness usually detectable over the left 
side. Liver dullness usually extends up to 5th rib, right mid-clavicular line; below this, 
resonant chest is a sign of lung hyperexpansion (eg asthma, COPD). Hyper-resonant 
percussion note: Pneumothorax or hyperinﬂ ation (COPD).
Table 2.8  Auscultation
Breath sounds Description
Vesicular
Bronchial 
breathing

Rustling quality
Harsh with gap between inspiration 
and expiration. Increased vocal reso-
nance and whispering pectoriloquy
Diffi  cult to hear

Pathology
Normal
Consolidation, localized ﬁ bro-
sis, above pleural/percardial 
eff usion (Ewart’s sign, p154)
Pleural eff usion, pleural 
thickening, pneumothorax, 
bronchial obstruction, asthma, 
or COPD
Life-threatening asthma

Inaudible breath sounds
Air expired through narrow airways
 • Monophonic (single note, partial 

obstruction one airway)

 • Tumour occluding airway

 • Polyphonic (multiple notes, wide-

 • Asthma, cardiac wheeze 

spread airway narrowing)
Reopening of small airways on 
inspiration
 • Fine and late in inspiration
 • Coarse and mid inspiratory
 • Early inspiratory
 • Late/pan inspiratory
 • Disappear post cough
Movement of visceral pleura over 
parietal when both are roughened 
(eg due to inﬂ ammatory exudate)
Shallow left pneumo thorax between 
layers of parietal pleura overlying 
heart, heard during cardiac systole

(LVF)

 • Pulmonary oedema
 • Bronchiectasis
 • Small airway disease
 • Alveolar disease
 • Insigniﬁ cant
 • Pneumonia
 • Pulmonary infarction

Diminished 
breath sounds

Silent chest
Wheeze 
(rhonchi)

Crackles (crepi-
tations)

Pleural rub

Pneumothorax 
click

_OHCM_10e.indb   52

_OHCM_10e.indb   52

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
53

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

  Signs of respiratory distress
  • Tachypnoea.
  • Nasal ﬂ aring.
  • Tracheal tug (pulling of thyroid cartilage towards sternal notch in inspiration).
  • Use of accessory muscles (sternocleidomastoid, platysma, infrahyoid).
  • Intercostal, subcostal, and sternal recession.
  • Pulsus paradoxus (p42).

Breathing patterns
Hyperventilation: Tachypnoea (ie >20 breaths/min) or deep (hyper pnoea, ie tidal 
volume). Hyperpnoea is not unpleasant, unlike dyspnoea. It may cause respiratory 
alkalosis, hence paraesthesiae ± muscle spasm (Ca2+). The main cause is anxiety: 
associated dizziness, chest tightness/pain, palpit ations, and panic. Rare causes: 
response to metabolic acidosis; brainstem lesions.
  • Kussmaul  respiration  is  deep,  sighing  breaths  in  severe  metabolic  acidosis 

(blowing off  CO2), eg diabetic or alcoholic ketoacidosis, renal impairment.

  • Neurogenic hyperventilation is produced by pontine lesions.
  • The hyperventilation syndrome involves panic attacks associated with hyper-
ventilation,  palpitations,  dizziness,  faintness,  tinnitus,  alarming  chest  pain/
tightness, perioral and peripheral tingling (plasma Ca2+). Treatment: relaxation 
techniques and breathing into a paper bag (inspired CO 2 corrects the alkalosis).
NB: the anxious patient in A&E with hyperventilation and a respiratory alkalosis 
may actually be presenting with an aspirin overdose (p844).

Cheyne–Stokes breathing: Breaths get deeper and deeper, then shallower (±epi-
sodic apnoea) in cycles. Causes—brainstem lesions or compression (stroke, ICP). 
If the cycle is long (eg 3min), the cause may be a long lung-to-brain circulation time 
(eg in chronic pulmonary oedema or cardiac output). It is enhanced by opioids.

Sputum examination
Further examination—sputum, temperature charts, O2 sats, PEFR: Inspect spu-
tum and send suspicious sputum for microscopy (Gram stain and auramine/ZN 
stain, if indicated), culture, and cytology.
  • Black carbon specks suggests smoking: commonest cause of increased sputum.
  • Yellow/green sputum suggests infection, eg bronchiectasis, pneumonia.
  • Pink frothy sputum suggests pulmonary oedema.
  • Bloody sputum (haemoptysis) may be due to malignancy, TB, infection, or trau-

ma, and requires investigation for these causes. See p49.

  • Clear sputum is probably saliva.

Fig 2.21  The respiratory segments supplied by the segmental bronchi.

_OHCM_10e.indb   53

_OHCM_10e.indb   53

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
54

The respiratory system: important presentations

Some physical signs (ﬁg 2.22).

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

(There may be
bronchial breathing
at the top of an effusion)
Expansion:  
Percussion:  (stony dull)
Air entry: 
Vocal resonance:  
Trachea + mediastinum central 
(shift away from affected side
only with massive effusions
≥ 1000mL)

Expansion  
Percussion note 
Vocal resonance  
Bronchial breathing ± 
coarse crackles (with 
whispering pectoriloquy)
Trachea + mediastinum central 

PLEURAL
EFFUSION

CONSOLIDATION

Expansion  
Percussion note 
Breath sounds  
Trachea + mediastinum shift
towards the affected side

SPONTANEOUS
PNEUMOTHORAX/
EXTENSIVE COLLAPSE
( LOBECTOMY/
PNEUMONECTOMY)

Expansion  
Percussion note 
Breath sounds  
Trachea + mediastinum shift
away from the affected side

TENSION
PNEUMOTHORAX
(See ﬁg 16.43, p749 for
chest X-ray image)

Expansion  
Percussion note 
Breath sounds bronchial
± crackles
Trachea + mediastinum
central or pulled towards
the area of ﬁbrosis

FIBROSIS

Fig 2.22  Physical signs on chest examination. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   54

_OHCM_10e.indb   54

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Chest deformities
  • Barrel  chest:  AP  diameter,  tracheal  descent  and  chest  expansion  ,  seen  in 

55

chronic hyperinﬂ ation (eg asthma/COPD).

  • Pigeon chest (pectus carinatum): See ﬁ g 2.23.
  • Funnel chest (pectus excavatum): Develop mental defect involving local ster-

num depression (lower end). See ﬁ g 2.24.

  • Kyphosis: ‘Hump back’ from AP thoracic spine curvature.
  • Scoliosis: Lateral curvature (OHCS p674); all of these may cause a restrictive ven-

tilatory defect. 

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig  2.23  Pectus  carinatum  (pigeon  chest). 
Prominent  sternum,  from  lung  hyperinﬂ a-
tion  while  the  bony  thorax  is  still  develop-
ing,  eg  in  chronic  childhood  asthma.  Often 
seen  with  Harrison’s  sulcus,  a  groove  de-
formity  caused  by  indrawing  of  lower  ribs 
at  the  diaphragm  attachment  site.  This 
usually  has  little  functional  signiﬁ cance  in 
terms  of  respiration  but  can  have  signiﬁ -
cant psychological eff ects: see BOX.

Image courtesy of Prof Eric Fonkalsrud.

Fig  2.24  Pectus  excavatum;  the  term 
for  funnel  or  sunken  chest.  It  is  often 
asymptomatic,  but  may  cause  dis-
placement  of  the  heart  to  the  left,  and 
restricted  ventilatory  capacity  ±  mild 
air-trapping.  Associ ations: 
scoliosis; 
Mar fan’s; Ehlers–Danlos syndrome.

Image courtesy of Prof Eric Fonkalsrud.

Herr Minty and his pigeon chest
Chest  wall  deformities  such  as  pectus  excavatum  are  quite  common,  often 
appearing  during  adolescent  growth  spurts.  Exercise  intolerance  is  the  main 
symptom  (from  heart  comp ression—consider  CXR/CT).  Indications  for  surgical 
correction  (rarely  needed):  ≥2:  a  severe,  symptomatic  deformity;  progression 
of  deformity;  paradoxical  respiratory  chest  wall  motion;  pectus  index  >3.25  on 
CT; cardiac or lung compression; restrictive spirometry; cardiac pathology that 
might be from compression of the heart.

Psychological eff ects are interesting and not to be dismissed as their eff ects 
may be greater than any physical eff ects.8 Because these people hate exposing 
their chests they may become introverted, and never learn to swim, so don’t let 
them sink without trace. Be sympathetic, and remember Herr Minty, who inau-
gurated Graham Greene’s theory of compensation: wherever a defect exists we 
must look for a compensating perfection to account for how the defect survives. 
In Minty’s case, although ‘crooked and yellow and pigeon-chested he had his deep 
refuge, the in exhaustible ingenuity of his mind.’

_OHCM_10e.indb   55

_OHCM_10e.indb   55

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
56

The gastrointestinal system: history

See table 2.9 for direct questions to ask regarding presenting symptoms.
Table 2.9  Presenting symptoms and questions to ask
Presenting symptoms
Abdominal pain (see p57 and p606)
Distension (see p57)
Nausea, vomiting (see table 2.10)
Haematemesis (pp256–7)

Direct questions
SOCRATES (p36)

Timing? Relation to meals? Amount? Content 
(liquid, solid, bile, blood)? Frequency? Fresh 
(bright red)/dark/‘coff ee grounds’? Consider 
neoplasia (weight loss, dysphagia, pain, mel-
aena?), NSAIDS/warfarin? Surgery? Smoking?
Level? Onset? Intermittent? Progressive? Painful 
swallow (odynophagia)?
Timing (relation to meals)?
Consider neoplasia (weight loss, dysphagia, pain, 
melaena?)

Pain on defecation? Mucus? Fresh/dark/black? 
Mixed with stool/on surface/on paper/in the 
pan?
Intentional? Quantify. Dysphagia? Pain?

Pruritus? Dark urine? Pale stools?

Dysphagia (p250)

Indigestion/dyspepsia/reﬂ ux (p252)
Recent change in bowel habit

Diarrhoea (p258), constipation (p260)
Rectal bleeding (p629) or
melaena (p246)

Appetite, weight change
Jaundice (p272)

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Past history Peptic ulcer disease, carcinoma, jaundice, hepatitis, blood transfusions, 
tattoos, previous operations, last menstrual period (LMP), dietary changes.
Drug history Especially steroids, NSAIDS, antibiotics, anticoagulants (eg clopidogrel 
with SSRI—see BOX ‘SSRIS and upper GI bleeding risk’).
Family history Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
peptic ulcer disease, polyps, cancer, jaundice.
Social history Smoking, alcohol (quantify units/week), recreational drug use, travel 
history, tropical illnesses, contact with jaundiced persons, occupational exposures, 
sexual history, blood transfusions, surgery over-seas.
Vomiting History is vital. Associated symptoms and past medical history often indi-
cate cause (table 2.10). Examine for dehydration, distension, tenderness, abdominal 
mass, succussion splash in children (pyloric stenosis), or tinkling bowel sounds (in-
testinal obstruction).
Table 2.10  Causes of vomiting
Gastrointestinal
 • Gastroenteritis
 • Peptic ulceration
 • Pyloric stenosis
 • Intestinal obstruction
 • Paralytic ileus
 • Acute cholecystitis
 • Acute pancreatitis
Alcohol and drugs
 • Antibiotics
 • Opiates
 • Cytotoxics
 • Digoxin
*How to remember the chief non-GI causes of vomiting? Try ABCDEFGHI: Acute kidney injury Addison’s 
disease; Brain (eg ICP); Cardiac (myocardial infarct); Diabetic ketoacidosis; Ears (eg labyrinthitis, Ménière’s 
disease); Foreign substances (alcohol; drugs, eg opiates); Gravidity (eg hyperemesis gravidarum); Hypercal-
caemia/Hyponatraemia; Infection (eg UTI, meningitis).

CNS
 • Meningitis/encephalitis
 • Migraine
 • Intracranial pressure
 • Brainstem lesions
 • Motion sickness
 • Ménière’s disease
 • Labyrinthitis
Psychiatric
 • Self-induced
 • Psychogenic
 • Bulimia nervosa

Metabolic/endocrine
 • Uraemia
 • Hypercalcaemia
 • Hyponatraemia
 • Pregnancy
 • Diabetic ketoacidosis
 • Addison’s disease

Others*
 • Myocardial infarction
 • Autonomic neuropathy
 • Sepsis (UTI; meningitis)

_OHCM_10e.indb   56

_OHCM_10e.indb   56

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
57

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Abdominal pain
Character depends on underlying cause. Examples: irritation of the mucosa (acute 
gastritis), smooth muscle spasm (acute enterocolitis), capsular stretching (liver con-
gestion in CCF), peritoneal inﬂ ammation (acute appendicitis), and direct splanchnic 
nerve stimulation (retro peritoneal extension of tumour). The character (constant 
or  colicky,  sharp  or  dull),  duration,  and  frequency  depend  on  the  mechanism  of 
production. The location and distribution of referred pain depend on the anatomi-
cal site. Time of occurrence and aggravating or relieving factors such as meals, 
defecation, and sleep also have special signiﬁ cance related to the underlying disease 
process. The site of the pain may provide a clue:
  • Epigastric:  Pancreatitis,  gastritis/duodenitis,  peptic  ulcer,  gallbladder  disease, 

aortic aneurysm.

  • Left  upper  quadrant:  Peptic  ulcer,  gastric  or  colonic  (splenic  ﬂ exure)  cancer, 
splenic rupture, subphrenic or perinephric abscess, renal (colic, pyelonephritis).
  • Right  upper  quadrant:  Cholecystitis,  biliary  colic,  hepatitis,  peptic  ulcer,  colonic 
cancer (hepatic ﬂ exure), renal (colic, pyelonephritis), subphrenic/perinephric ab-
scess.

  • Loin: (lateral ⅓ of back between thorax and pelvis—merges with the ﬂ ank, p565) 
Renal colic, pyelonephritis, renal tumour, perinephric abscess, pain referred from 
vertebral column. Causes of ﬂ ank pain are similar (see index for fuller list).

  • Left iliac fossa: Diverticulitis, volvulus, colon cancer, pelvic abscess, inﬂ am m atory 
bowel disease, hip pathology, renal colic, urinary tract infection (UTI), cancer in 
undescended testis; zoster—wait for the rash! (p454). Gynae: torsion of ovarian 
cyst, salpingitis, ectopic pregnancy.

  • Right  iliac  fossa  pain:  All  causes  of  left  iliac  fossa  pain  plus  appendicitis  and 

Crohn’s ileitis, but usually excluding diverticulitis.

  • Pelvic: Urological: UTI, retention, stones. Gynae: menstruation, pregnancy, endome-

triosis (OHCS p288), salpingitis, endometritis (OHCS p274), ovarian cyst torsion.

  • Generalized: Gastroenteritis, irritable bowel syndrome, peritonitis, constipation.
  • Central: Mesenteric ischaemia, abdominal aneurysm, pancreatitis.
Remember referred pain: Myocardial infarct  epigastrium; pleural pathology.
Abdominal distension (masses and the ‘famous ﬁ ve’ Fs)
Enid Blyton’s Famous Five characters can generally solve any crime or diag nos tic 
problem  using  1950s  methodologies  steeped  in  endless  school  holi days,  copious 
confection-laden mid night feasts, and lashings of homemade ginger beer.

Let’s give them the problem of abdominal distension. The sweets and drinks used 
by the Famous Five actually contribute to the distension itself: fat, fluid, faeces, 
flatus, and fetus. If you think it far-fetched to implicate ginger beer in the genesis 
of fetuses, note that because it was homemade, like the fun, there was no limit to 
its intoxicating powers in those long-gone vintage summers. The point is to think to 
ask ‘When was your last period?’ whenever confronted by a distended abdomen.

Flatus will be resonant on percussion. Fluid will be dull, and can be from ascites (eg 
from malignancy or cirrhosis: look for shifting dullness), distended bladder (cannot 
get below it) or an aortic aneurysm (expansile). Masses can be pelvic (think of uter-
ine ﬁ broids or ovarian pathology) or tumours from colon, stomach, pancreas, liver, or 
kidney. Also see causes of ascites with portal hypertension (p604), hepatomegaly 
(p61), splenomegaly, and other abdominal masses (p604).

SSRIS and upper GI bleeding risk
SSRIs have been associated with an increased risk of bleeding.9 SSRIs are thought 
to increase gastric acidity and serotonin is thought to play a role in platelet ag-
gregation. This may lead to an increased risk of ulcers and bleeding, particularly 
when co-prescribed with anticoagulants and drugs aff ecting intestinal lining (eg 
NSAIDS).  NICE10  recommends  cautious  concomitant  use  of  SSRIs  with  anticoagu-
lants or NSAIDS and recommends gastroprotection (eg PPI) for older patients tak-
ing NSAIDs or aspirin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   57

_OHCM_10e.indb   57

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
58

Gastrointestinal symptoms

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Faecal incontinence
This is common in the elderly. Do your best to help, and get social services involved 
if concerned. Continence depends on many factors—mental function, stool (volume 
and consistency), anatomy (sphincter function, rectal distensibility, anorectal sensa-
tion and reﬂ exes). Defects in any area can cause loss of faecal continence.
Causes:  Often  multifactorial.  Is  it  passive  faecal  soiling  or  urgency-related  stool 
loss? Consider the following:
  • Sphincter dysfunction:

  • Vaginal delivery is the commonest cause due to sphincter tears or pudendal 

nerve damage.

  • Surgical trauma, eg following procedures for ﬁ stulas, haemorrhoids, ﬁ ssures.
  • Impaired sensation—diabetes, MS, dementia, any spinal cord lesions (consider 

cord compression if acute faecal incontinence).

  • Faecal impaction—overﬂ ow diarrhoea, extremely common, especially in the el-

derly, and very easily treated.

  • Idiopathic—although  there  is  often  no  clear  cause  found,  especially  in  elderly 
women, this is usually multifactorial, including a combination of poor sphincter 
tone and pudendal damage leading to poor sensation.

Assessment:
Do PR (overﬂ ow incontinence? poor tone?) and assess neurological function of legs, 
particularly checking sensation.
Refer to a specialist (esp. if rectal prolapse, anal sphincter injury, lumbar disc disease, 
or alarm symptoms for colon ca exist). Consider anorectal manometry, pelvic ultra-
sound or MRI, and pudendal nerve testing may be needed.
Treat according to cause and to promote dignity:
Never let your own embarrassment stop you from off ering help. Knowledge and 
behaviour are key factors:
  • Ensure toilet is in easy reach. Plan trips in the knowledge of toilet locations.
  • Obey call-to-stool impulses (esp. after meal, ie the gastro-colic reﬂ ex).
  • Ensure  access  to  latest  continence  aids  and  advice  on  use,  refer  to  continence 

nurse specialist for assessment.

  • Pelvic ﬂ oor rehabilitation: eg can help faecal incontinence, squeeze pressure, and 

maximal tolerated volume.

  • Loperamide 2–4mg 45min before social engagements may prevent accidents out-
side home. An anal cotton plug may help isolated internal sphincter weakness. Skin 
care. Support agencies.

If all sensible measures fail, try a brake-and-accelerator approach: enemas to empty 
the rectum (twice weekly) and codeine phosphate, eg 15mg/12h, on non-enema days 
to constipate. It’s not a cure, but makes the incontinence manageable.
Flatulence
Normally, 400–1300mL of gas is expelled PR in 8–20 discrete (or indiscrete) episodes 
per day. If this, with any eructation (belching) or distension, seems excessive to the 
patient, they may complain of ﬂ atulence. Eructation occurs in hiatus hernia—but 
most patients with ‘ﬂ atulence’ have no GI disease. Air swal lowing (aerophagy) is the 
main cause of ﬂ atus; here N2 is the chief gas. If ﬂ atus is mostly methane, H2 and CO2, 
then fermentation by bowel bacteria is the cause, and reducing carbohydrate intake 
(eg less lactose and wheat) may help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   58

_OHCM_10e.indb   58

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
59

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Tenesmus
This is a sensation in the rectum of incomplete emptying after defecat ion. It’s com-
mon in irritable bowel syndrome (p266), but can be caused by tumours.
Regurgitation
Gastric  and  oesophageal  contents  are  regurgitated  eff ortlessly  into  the  mouth—
without contraction of abdominal muscles and diaphragm (so distinguishing it from 
true vomiting). It may be worse on lying ﬂ at, and can cause cough and nocturnal 
asthma. Regurgitation is rarely preceded by nausea, and when due to gastro-oe-
sophageal reﬂ ux, it is often associated with heartburn. An oesophageal pouch may 
cause regurgitation. Very high GI obstructions (eg gastric volvulus, p611) cause non-
productive retching rather than true regurgitation.
Steatorrhoea
These are pale stools that are diffi  cult to ﬂ ush, and are caused by malabsorption of 
fat in the small intestine and hence greater fat content in the stool.
Causes: Ileal disease (eg Crohn’s or ileal resection), pancreatic disease, and obstruc-
tive jaundice (due to excretion of bile salts from the gallbladder).
Dyspepsia
Dyspepsia and indigestion (p252) are broad terms. Dyspepsia is deﬁ ned as one or 
more of post-prandial fullness, early satiety (unable to ﬁ nish meal), and/or epigastric 
or retrosternal pain or burning. ‘Indigestion’ reported by the patient can refer to 
dyspepsia,  bloating,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Try  to  ﬁ nd  out  exactly  what  your  pa-
tient means and when these symptoms occur in relation to meals, eg the classic 
symptoms of peptic ulcers occur 2–5 hours after a meal and on an empty stomach. 
Look  for  alarm  symptoms  (see  p248);  these  have  high  negative  predictive  value. 
If all patients with dyspepsia undergo endoscopy, <33% have clinically signiﬁ cant 
ﬁ ndings.11 Myocardial infaction may present as ‘indigestion’.
Halitosis
Halitosis (fetor oris, oral malodour) results from gingivitis (rarely severe enough to 
cause Vincent’s angina, p712), metabolic activity of bacteria in plaque, or sulﬁ de-yield-
ing food putrefaction, eg in gingival pockets and tonsillar crypts. Patients can often be 
anxious and convinced of halitosis when it is not present (and vice versa!).
Contributory factors:
Smoking, drugs (disulﬁ ram; isosorbide), lung disease, hangovers.
:
Try to eliminate anaerobes:
  • Good dental hygiene, dental ﬂ oss, tongue scraping.
  • 0.2% aqueous chlorhexidine gluconate.
The very common halitosis arising from the tongue’s dorsum is secondary to over-
populated volatile sulfur compound-producing bacteria. Locally retained bacteria 
metabolize sulfur-containing amino acids to yield volatile ( smelly) hydrogen sulﬁ de 
and  methylmercaptane,  which  perpetuate  periodontal  disease.  At  night  and  be-
tween meals, conditions are optimal for odour production—so eating regularly may 
help. Treat by mechanical cleansing/scraping using tongue brushes or scrapes plus 
mouthwashes. Oral care products containing metal ions, especially Zn, inhibit odour 
formation, it is thought, because of affi  nity of the metal ion to sulfur. It is possible 
to measure the level of volatile sulfur-containing compounds in the air in the mouth 
directly by means of a portable sulﬁ de monitor.

_OHCM_10e.indb   59

_OHCM_10e.indb   59

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
60

Examination of the abdomen

Begin by introducing yourself, obtaining consent to examine, and position the patient 
appropriately; lie the patient down as ﬂ at as possible, ideally exposing from ‘nipples 
to knees’. In practice, keep the groin covered and examine separately for hernias, etc. 

1  General inspection
  • Assess general state (ill/well/cachexic)
  • Clues (vomit bowl, stoma bags, cath-

eter, urine colour)

  • Colour (pale, jaundiced, uraemic)
  • Body mass index?
  • Scars on the abdomen? Stomas 

(ﬁ g 2.25)?

Ask the patient to lift their head off  the 
bed, or cough, looking for bulges, disten-
sion or pain.

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig 2.25  Stoma.

Reproduced from MacKay G, et al. (eds). 
Oxford Specialist Handbook of Colorectal 
Surgery (2010), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

2  Hands

  • Inspect: Clubbing, koilonychia, 

leuconychia, Muehrcke’s lines, palmar 
erythema, Dupuytren’s contracture 
(ﬁ g 2.26), pigmentation of the palmer 
creases
  • Asterixis: (See p50)

3  Arms

  • Check pulse and blood pressure
  • Look in the distribution of the SVC (arms, 

upper chest, upper back) for spider 
naevi (ﬁ g 2.27)

  • Check for track marks, bruising, 

pigmentation, scratch marks, arterio-
venous ﬁ stulae (see p303 for signs seen 
in patients with chronic kidney disease)

4  Neck

  • Examine cervical and supraclavicular 

lymph nodes (see ﬁ g 2.28)

  • JVP  raised  in  ﬂ uid  overload  (renal  dys-
function,  liver  dysfunction),  tricuspid 
regurgitation  (may  cause  pulsatile  he-
patomegaly)

  • Scars from tunnelled haemodialysis lines 
(see p303) or other central venous access

5  Face

  • Skin and eyes: Jaundice, conjunc-
tival pallor, Kayser–Fleischer rings, 
xanthelasma (see ﬁ g 2.29), sunken eyes 
(dehydration)

  • Mouth: Angular stomatitis, pigmenta-
tion, telangiectasia, ulcers, glossitis

Fig 2.26  Dupuytren’s contracture.

Fig 2.27  Spider naevi.

Fig 2.28  Cervical and supraclavicular nodes.
Reproduced from Thomas J,  et al. (eds). Oxford 
Handbook of Clinical Examination and Practi-
cal Skills (2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 2.29  Xanthelasma.

_OHCM_10e.indb   60

_OHCM_10e.indb   60

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
6  Abdomen

Inspection:
  • Scars—previous surgery, transplant, stoma
  • Visible masses, hernias, or pulsation of AAA
  • Visible veins suggesting portal hypertension
  • Gynaecomastia, hair loss, acanthosis nigricans
Palpation:
Squat by the bed so that the patient’s abdomen is at 
your eye level. Ask if there is any pain and examine 
this part last. Watch the patient’s face for signs of 
discomfort. Palpate the entire abdomen (see p565):
  • Light  palpation—if this elicits pain, check for re-
bound tenderness. Any involuntary tension in mus-
cles (‘guarding’)? See p606.

  • Deep palpation—to detect masses.
  • Liver—using the radial border of the index ﬁ nger 
aligned with the costal margin start palpation from 
the RIF. Press down and ask patient to take a deep 
breath. Continue upwards towards the costal mar-
gin until you feel the liver edge.

  • Spleen—start  palpation  in  RIF  and  work  towards 
the left costal margin asking the patient to take a 
deep breath in and feeling for edge of the spleen.
  • Kidneys—for  each  kidney:  place  one  hand  behind 
patient’s  loin,  press  down  on  the  abdomen  with 
your other hand and ‘ballot’ the kidney up with your 
lower hand against your upper hand (ﬁ g 2.30). Un-
less slim or pathology present, may not be palpable.
  • Aorta—palpate  midline  above  umbilicus,  is  it  ex-

pansile? (ﬁ g 2.49, p79).

Percussion:
  • Liver—percuss to map upper & lower border of liver.
  • Spleen—percuss from border of spleen as palpat-

ed, around to mid-axillary line.

  • Bladder—if enlarged, suprapubic region will be dull.
  • Ascites—shifting dullness: percuss centrally to lat-
erally until dull, keep your ﬁ nger at the dull spot and 
ask patient to lean onto opposite side. If the dull-
ness was ﬂ uid, this will now have moved by gravity 
and the previously dull area will be resonant.

Auscultation:
  • Bowel sounds—listen just below the umbilicus.
  • Bruits—listen over aorta and renal arteries (either 

side of midline above umbilicus).

61

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Fig  2.30  Ballottement  of  the 
kidneys.
Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. 
(eds). Oxford Handbook of Clini-
cal Examination and Practical 
Skills (2007), with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

7  To complete the examination
  • Palpate for ankle oedema, examine the hernial oriﬁ ces, external genitalia, and 
perform a rectal examination. Check the observation chart and dipstick urine.

Top tips
  • If you think there is a spleen tip, roll the patient onto their right side and feel 
again. This tips the spleen forward and allows you to percuss around to the back.
  • Check the back for spider naevi, even if the chest appears clear (look for nephrec-

tomy scars as you do this).

  • Light palpation really should be light, to check for tenderness and very large 

masses, watching the patient’s face throughout.

  • If you suspect voluntary guarding, use the diaphragm of your stethoscope to as-
sist with palpation and distract the patient who will think you are auscultating!

_OHCM_10e.indb   61

_OHCM_10e.indb   61

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
62

The gastrointestinal system: examination

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Inspection
Does your patient appear comfortable or in distress? Look for abnormal contours/
distension.  Tattoos?  Cushingoid  appearance  may  suggest  steroid  use  post-trans-
plant or IBD. Inspect (and smell) for signs of chronic liver disease:

  • Hepatic fetor on breath (p274).
  • Purpura (purple-stained skin, p344).
  • Spider naevi (ﬁ g 2.27, p60).
  • Asterixis.

  • Gynaecomastia.
  • Scratch marks.
  • Palmar erythema.

  • Clubbing (rare).
  • Muscle wasting.
  • Jaundice.

Look for signs of malignancy (cachexia, masses), anaemia, jaundice, Virchow’s node. 
From the end of the bed inspect the abdomen for:

  • Visible pulsation (aneurysm, p654).
  • Striae (stretch marks, eg pregnancy).

  • Peristalsis.
  • Distension.

  • Scars.
  • Genitalia.

  • Masses.
  • Herniae.

If abdominal wall veins look dilated, assess direction of ﬂ ow. In inferior vena caval 
(IVC) obstruction, below the umbilicus blood ﬂ ows up; in portal hypertension (caput 
medusae), ﬂ ow radiates out from the umbilicus.
The cough test: While looking at the face, ask the patient to cough. If this causes 
abdominal pain, ﬂ inching, or a protective movement of hands towards the abdomen, 
suspect peritonitis.
Hands
Clubbing,  leuconychia  (whitening  of  the  nails  due  to  hypoalbuminaemia),  koilo-
nychia (‘spooning’ of the nails due to iron, B12, or folate deﬁ ciency), Muehrcke’s lines 
(transverse white lines due to hypoalbuminaemia), blue lunulae (bluish discoloura-
tion seen in Wilson’s disease). Palmar erythema (chronic liver disease, pregnancy), 
Dupuytren’s contracture (thickening and ﬁ brous contraction of palmar fascia (see 
ﬁ g 2.26, p60; alcoholic liver disease)). Hepatic ﬂ ap/asterixis (hepatic encephalopa-
thy, uraemia from renal disease), check pulse and respiratory rate (infection/sepsis?), 
palpate for AV ﬁ stulae in the forearm (haemodialysis access in renal failure).
Face
Assess for jaundice, anaemia, xanthelasma (PBC, chronic obstruction), Kayser–Fleis-
cher rings (green-yellow ring at corneal margin seen in Wilson’s disease). Inspect 
mouth for angular stomatitis (thiamine, B12, iron deﬁ ciency), pigmentation (Peutz–
Jeghers syndrome, p709, ﬁ g 15.14), telangiectasia (Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome/
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia, p709, ﬁ g 15.12), ulcers (IBD), glossitis (iron, 
B12, or folate deﬁ ciency).
Cervical lymph nodes
Palpate  for  enlarged  left  supraclavicular  lymph  node  (Virchow’s  node/Troisier’s 
sign) (gastric carcinoma?).
Abdomen
Inspect: Look around to the ﬂ anks for nephrectomy scars.
Palpate: Note any masses, tenderness, guarding (involuntary tensing of abdominal 
muscles—pain or fear of it), or rebound tenderness (greater pain on removing hand 
than on gently depressing abdomen—peritoneal inﬂ ammation); Rovsing’s sign (ap-
pendicitis, p608); Murphy’s sign (cholecystitis, p634). Palpating the liver: Assess size 
(see BOX ‘Causes of hepatomegaly’), regularity, smoothness, and tenderness. Pulsa-
tile (tricuspid regurgitation)? The scratch test is another way to ﬁ nd the lower liver 
edge (if it is below the costal margin): start with diaphragm of stethoscope at right 
costal margin. Gently scratch the abdominal wall, starting in the right lower quad-
rant, working towards the liver edge. A sharp increase in trans mission of the scratch 
is heard when the border of the liver is reached. Palpating the spleen: If suspect 
splenomegaly but cannot detect it, assess patient in the right lateral position with 
your left hand pulling forwards from behind the rib cage. Palpating the kidneys: 
See ﬁ g 2.30, p61. May be non palpable unless slim. Enlarged? Nodular? Palpating the 
aorta: Normally palpable transmitted pulsation in thin individuals.

_OHCM_10e.indb   62

_OHCM_10e.indb   62

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
63

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Percussion
Conﬁ rm the lower border and deﬁ ne the upper border of the liver and spleen (dull in 
the mid-axillary line in the 10th intercostal space). Percuss all regions of abdomen. If 
this induces pain, there may be peritoneal inﬂ ammation below (eg an inﬂ amed ap-
pendix). Some experts percuss ﬁ rst, before palpation, because even anxious patients 
do not expect this to hurt—so, if it does hurt, this is a very valuable sign. Percuss for 
the shifting dullness of ascites (p61 & p604) but ultrasound is a more reliable way of 
detecting ascites.
Auscultation
Bowel sounds: absence implies ileus; they are enhanced and tink ling in bowel ob-
struction. Listen for bruits in the aorta, renal and femoral arteries.
Further examination Check for hernias (p612), perform a PR examination see BOX 
‘Examination of the rectum and anus’.

Examination of the rectum and anus
It is necessary to have a chaperone present for the examination. Explain what 
you are about to do. Make sure curtains are pulled. Have the patient lie on their 
left side, with knees brought up towards the chest. Use gloves and lubricant. Part 
the  buttocks  and  inspect  the  anus:  •A  gaping  anus  suggests  a  neuropathy  or 
megarectum. •Symmetry (a tender unilateral bulge suggests an abscess). •Pro-
lapsed piles. •A subanodermal clot may peep out. •Prolapsed rectum (descent of 
>3cm when asked to strain, as if to pass a motion). •Anodermatitis (from frequent 
soiling). The anocutaneous reﬂ ex tests sensory and motor innervation—on lightly 
stroking the anal skin, does the external sphincter brieﬂ y contract?

Press  your  index  ﬁ nger  against  the  side  of  the  anus.  Ask  the  patient  to 
breathe deeply and insert your ﬁ nger slowly. Feel for masses (haemorrhoids are not 
palpable) or impacted stool. Twist your arm so that the pad of your ﬁ nger is feeling 
anteriorly. Feel for the cervix or prostate. Note consistency, size, and symmetry of 
the prostate. If there is faecal incontinence or concern about the spinal cord, ask the 
patient to squeeze your ﬁ nger and note the tone. This is best done with your ﬁ nger 
pad facing posteriorly. Note stool or blood on the glove and test for occult blood.

Wipe the anus. Consider proctoscopy (for the anus) or sigmoidoscopy (which 

mainly inspects the rectum).

Causes of hepatomegaly
(For hepatosplenomegaly, see p604.)
Malignancy: Metastatic or primary (usually craggy, irregular edge).
Hepatic congestion: Right heart failure—may be pulsatile in tricuspid incompe-
tence, hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd–Chiari syndrome, p696).
Anatomical: Riedel’s lobe (normal variant).
Infection: Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever), hepatitis viruses, malaria, 
schistosomiasis, amoebic abscess, hydatid cyst.
Haematological:  Leukaemia,  lymphoma,  myeloproliferative  disorders  (eg  my-
eloﬁ brosis), sickle-cell disease, haemolytic anaemias.
Others: Fatty liver, porphyria, amyloidosis, glycogen storage disorders.

Splenomegaly

  • Abnormally large spleen.
Causes: See p604. If massive, think of: chronic myeloid leukaemia, myeloﬁ brosis, 
malaria (or leishmaniasis).

Features of the spleen diff  erentiating it from an enlarged kidney
  • Cannot get above it (ribs overlie the upper border of the spleen).
  • Dull to percussion (kidney is usually resonant because of overlying bowel).
  • Moves towards RIF with inspiration (kidney tends to move downwards).
  • May have palpable notch on its medial side.

_OHCM_10e.indb   63

_OHCM_10e.indb   63

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
64

The neurological system: history

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

History This should be taken from the patient and if possible from a close friend or 
relative as well for corroboration/discrepancies. The patient’s memory, perception, 
or speech may be aff ected by the disorder, making the history diffi  cult to obtain. 
Note the progression of the symptoms and signs: gradual deterioration (eg tumour) 
vs intermittent exacerbations (eg multiple sclerosis) vs rapid onset (eg stroke). Ask 
about age, occupation, and ethnic origin. Right- or left-hand dominant?
Presenting symptoms
  • Headache:  (p456  &  p780.)  Diff erent  to  usual  headaches?  Acute/chronic?  Speed 
of onset? Single/recurrent? Unilateral/bilateral? Associated symptoms (eg aura 
with migraine, p458)? Any meningism (p822)? Worse on waking (ICP)? Decreased 
conscious level? Take a ‘worst-ever’ headache very seriously. (See p749.)

  • Muscle weakness: (p466.) Speed of onset? Muscle groups aff ected? Sensory loss? 

Any sphincter disturbance? Loss of balance? Associated spinal/root pain?

  • Visual disturbance: (OHCS p410.) eg blurring, double vision (diplopia), photophobia, 

visual loss. Speed of onset? Any preceding symptoms? Pain in eye?

  • Change in other senses: Hearing (p464), smell, taste? Abnormalities are not al-

ways due to neurological disease, consider ENT disease.

  • Dizziness: (p462.) Illusion of surroundings moving (vertigo)? Hearing loss/tinnitus? 

Any loss of consciousness? Positional?

  • Speech disturbance: (p86.) Diffi  culty in expression, articulation, or comprehension 

(can be diffi  cult to determine)? Sudden onset or gradual?

  • Dysphagia: (p250.) Solids and/or liquids? Intermittent or constant? Diffi  culty in 

coordination? Painful (odynophagia)?

  • Fits/faints/‘funny turns’/involuntary movements: (p468.) Frequency? Durat ion? 
Mode of onset? Preceding aura? Loss of consciousness? Tongue biting? Inconti-
nence? Any residual weakness/confusion? Family history?

  • Abnormal  sensations:  Eg  numbness,  ‘pins & needles’  (paraesthesiae),  pain,  odd 

sensations. Distribution? Speed of onset? Associated weakness?

  • Tremor: (p65.) Rapid or slow? Present at rest? Worse on deliberate movement? 

Taking -agonists? Any thyroid problems? Any family history? Fasciculations?

Cognitive state If there is any doubt about the patient’s cognition, cognitive testing 
should be undertaken. There are a number of tools including MMSE (subject to strict 
copyright),  GPCOG,  TYM, and 6-CIT. The Abbreviated Mental Test Score (AMTS) is a 
commonly used screening questionnaire for cognitive impairment:12

(eg 42 West Street)

1      Tell patient an address to recall at the end 

A  score  of  ≤6  suggests  poor  cognit-
ion,  acute  (delirium),  or  chronic  (de-
mentia).  AMTS  correlates  well  with 
the more detailed Mini-Mental State 
Examination  (MMSE™)  NB:  deaf,  dys-
phasic, depressed, and uncoop erative 
patients, as well as those who do not 
understand English, will also get low 
scores.13

2      Age
3      Time (to nearest hour)
4      What year is it?
5      Recognize 2 people (eg doctor & nurse)
6      Date of birth
7      Dates of the Second World War
8      Name of current monarch/prime minister
9      Where are you now? (Which hospital?)
10      Count backwards from 20 to 1
Past medical history Ask about meningitis/encephalitis, head/spine trauma, sei-
zures, previous operations, risk factors for vascular disease (p470, AF, hypertension, 
hyperlipidaemia,  diabetes,  smoking),  and  recent  travel,  especially  exotic  destina-
tions. Is there any chance that the patient is pregnant (eclampsia, OHCS p48)?
Drug  history  Any  anticonvulsant/antipsychotic/antidepressant  medication?  Any 
psychotropic drugs (eg ecstasy)? Any medication with neurological side-eff ects (eg 
isoniazid which can cause a peripheral neuropathy)?
Social and family history What can the patient do/not do, ie activities of daily 
living (ADLs)? What’s the Barthel Index score? Any family history of neurological 
or psychiatric disease? Any consanguinity? Consider sexual history, eg syphilis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   64

_OHCM_10e.indb   64

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
65

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Cramp
This is painful muscle spasm. Leg cramps are com mon at night or after heavy exer-
cise, and in patients with renal impairment or on dialysis. Cramp can signify salt de-
pletion, and rarely: muscle ischaemia (claudication, DM), myopathy (McArdle, p704), 
or dystonia (writer’s cramp, p469). Forearm cramps suggest motor neuron disease. 
Night cramps may respond to quinine bisulfate 300mg at night PO.
Drugs causing cramp: Diuretics (? from K+), domperidone, salbutamol/terbutaline 
IVI, ACE-i, telmisartan, celecoxib, lacidipine, ergot alkaloids, levothyroxine.
Paraesthesiae
‘Pins and needles’, numbness/tingling, which can hurt or ‘burn’ (dysaes th esia).
Causes:
Metab olic, Ca2+ (perioral); PaCO2; myxoedema; neurotoxins (tick bite; sting). Vascular, 
arterial emboli; Raynaud’s; DVT; high plasma viscosity. Anti body-mediated, paraneo-
plastic; SLE; ITP. Infection, rare: Lyme; rabies. Drugs, ACE-i. Brain,thalamic/parietal le-
sions. Cord, MS; myelitis/HIV; B12; lumbar fract ure. Plexopathy/mono neuropathy, 
see p502, cervical rib; carpal tun nel; sciatica. Peripheral neuropathy, glove & stocking, 
p504, eg DM; CKD. If paroxysmal, migraine; epilepsy; phaeochromocytoma. If wander-
ing, take travel history, consider infection, eg strongyloides.
Tremor
Tremor is rhythmic oscillation of limbs, trunk, head, or tongue. Three types:
1      Resting tremor—worst at rest—eg from parkinsonism (±bradykinesia and rigidity; 
tremor is more resistant to treatment than other symptoms). It is usually a slow 
tremor (frequency of 3–5Hz), typically ‘pill-rolling’ of the thumb over a ﬁ nger.

2      Postural tremor—worst if arms are outstretched. Typically rapid (8–12Hz). May 
be exaggerated physiological tremor (eg anxiety, hyperthyroidism, alcohol, drugs), 
due  to  brain  damage  (eg  Wilson’s  disease,  syphilis)  or  benign  essential  tremor 
(BET). This is often familial (autosomal dominant) tremor of arms and head pre-
senting at any age. Cogwheeling may occur but there is no brady kinesia. It is sup-
pressed by alcohol, and patients may self-medicate rather than admit problems. 
Rarely progressive (unless onset is unilateral). Propranolol (40–80mg/8–12h PO) can 
help, but not in all patients.

3      Intention  tremor—worst  on  movement,  seen  in  cerebellar  disease,  with  past-
pointing and dysdiadochokinesis (see p499). No eff ective drug has been found.

Facial pain
CNS causes: Migraine, trigeminal, or glossopharyngeal neuralgia (p457) or from any 
other pain-sensitive structure in the head or neck. Post-herpetic neuralgia: nasty 
burning-and-stabbing pain involves dermatomal areas aff ected by shingles (p404); 
it may aff ect cranial nerves V and VII in the face. It all too often becomes chronic 
and intractable (skin aff ected is exquisitely sensitive). Treatment is hard. Always 
give strong psychological support. Transcutaneous nerve stimulation, capsaicin oint-
ment, and inﬁ ltrating local anaesthetic are tried. Neuropathic pain agents, such as 
amitriptyline, eg 10–25mg/24h at night, or gabapentin (p504) may help. NB: famciclo-
vir or valaciclovir given in acute shingles may  duration of neuralgia.14
Vascular and non-neurological causes:
  • Neck—cervical disc pathology.
  • Bone/sinuses—sinusitis; neoplasia.
  • Eye—glaucoma; iritis; orbital cellulitis; eye strain; AVM.
  • Temporomandibular joint—arthritis or idiopathic dysfunction (common).
  • Teeth/gums—caries; broken teeth; abscess; malocclusion.
  • Ear—otitis media; otitis externa.
  • Vascular/vasculitis—arteriovenous ﬁ stula; aneurysm; or AVM at the cerebellopon-

tine angle; giant cell arteritis; SLE.

_OHCM_10e.indb   65

_OHCM_10e.indb   65

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
66

Neurological examination of the upper limbs

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The neurological system is usually the most daunting examination, so learn at the 
bedside from a senior colleague, preferably a neurologist. Keep practising. Be aware 
that books present ideal situations: often one or more signs are equivocal or even 
contrary to expectation; consider signs in the context of the history and try re-ex-
amining the patient, as signs may evolve over time. The only essential point is to 
distinguish whether weakness is upper (UMN) or lower (LMN) motor neuron (p446).
Position the patient comfortably, sitting up at 45° and with arms exposed. The order 
of examination should be Inspection, Tone, Power, Reﬂ exes, Coordination, Sensation 
(ﬁ g 2.31). 

1  General inspection
Abnormal  posturing,  asymmetry,  abnormal  move-
(fasciculation/tremor/dystonia/athetosis), 
ments 
muscle  wasting  (especially  small  muscles  of  the 
hand)—symmetrical/asymmetrical? Local/general?

2  Tone
Ask patient to ‘relax/go ﬂ oppy like a rag-doll’. Ask if 
patient has any pain in hands/arm/shoulder before 
passively ﬂ exing and extending limb while also pro-
nating and supinating the forearm. Any spasticity 
or rigidity?

3  Power
Direct  patient  to  adopt  each  position  and  follow 
commands while you as the examiner stabilize the 
joint  above  and  resist  movements  as  appropriate 
to grade power (see BOX ‘Muscle weakness grading’ 
on p446). Test each muscle group bilaterally before 
moving  on  to  the  next  position.  See  p452–3  for 
myotomes.
  • ‘Shrug your shoulders and don’t let me push 

down; push your arms out to the side against me; 
try to pull them back in.’

  • ‘Hold your arms up like this and pull me towards 

you, now push me away.’

  • ‘Hold your hand out ﬂ at, don’t let me push it 

down; now don’t let me push it up.’

  • Off er the patient two (crossed) ﬁ ngers of yours 

and ask them to ‘squeeze my ﬁ ngers.’

  • Ask patient to ‘spread your ﬁ n gers and stop me 
pushing them back together’, then hand the pa-
tient a piece of paper to grip between two ﬁ ngers. 
You as the examiner should grip the paper with 
your corresponding ﬁ ngers while asking patient to 
‘grip the paper and don’t let me pull it away.’

_OHCM_10e.indb   66

_OHCM_10e.indb   66

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
67

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

4  Reﬂ exes
For each reﬂ ex, test right, then left and com-
pare.  If  absent,  attempt  to  elicit  with  ‘rein-
forcement’  by  asking  patient  to  clench  their 
teeth on a count of three, at which time you 
strike  (Jendrassik  manoeuvre).  Are  reﬂ exes 
absent/present 
reinforcement)/nor-
mal/brisk/exaggerated?  •Biceps (C5,6)  •Tri-
ceps (C7) •Supinator (C6). 

(with 

5  Coordination
Holding  your  ﬁ nger  in  front  of  the  patient 
instruct ‘touch my ﬁ nger then your nose…as 
fast as you can’. Look for intention tremor, and 
‘past pointing’.
  • Test for dysdiadokokinesis: ask patient to 
repeatedly  pronate  and  supinate  forearm, 
tapping  hands  each  time.  Test  both  limbs. 
You  may  have  to  demonstrate.  Failure  to 
perform  rapidly  alternating  movements  is 
dysdiadokokinesis.

  • Test for pronator drift: with patient’s eyes 
closed and arms outstretched, tap down on 
their up-facing palms and look for a failure to 
maintain supination.

6  Sensation
  • Light touch: Use cotton wool, touch (not rub) it to 
sternum ﬁ rst—‘this is what it should feel like, tell 
me where you feel it and if it feels diff erent’. Pro-
ceed to test with cotton wool in all dermatomes 
(see p454), comparing left and right.

  • Pin prick: Repeat as above using a neurological pin, 

asking patient to tell you if it feels sharp or dull.

  • Temperature: Repeat as above, alternating hot and 

cold probes. Can the patient tell hot from cold?

  • Vibration: Using a 128Hz tuning fork (128 vibrate!) 
conﬁ rm with patient that they ‘can feel a buzzing’ 
when you place the tuning fork on their sternum. 
Proceed  to  test  at  the  most  distal  bony  promi-
nence and move proximally by placing the buzzing 
fork on the bony prominence, then stopping it with 
your ﬁ ngers. Ask the patient to tell you when the 
buzzing stops.

  • Proprioception:  With  the  patient’s  eyes  closed 
grasp  distal  phalanx  of  the  index  ﬁ nger  at  the 
sides, not on top. Stabilize the rest of the ﬁ nger. 
Flex and extend the joint, stopping at intervals to 
ask whether the ﬁ nger tip is up or down.

Fig 2.31  Sensory dermatomes.

Reproduced from Harrison (ed) 
Revision Notes for MCEM Part A 
(2011), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Top tips
  • Use the tendon hammer like a pendulum, let it drop, don’t grip it too tightly.
  • Ensure you are testing light touch, not stroke sensation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   67

_OHCM_10e.indb   67

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
68

Neurological examination of the lower limbs

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

If the patient is able, begin your examination by asking the patient to remove their 
lower garments down to underwear, and to walk across the room. Gait analysis 
(p467) gives you more information than any other test. If they aren’t able to walk, 
start  with  them  lying  down,  legs  fully  exposed.  Then,  Inspection,  Tone,  Reﬂ exes, 
Power, Coordination, Sensation (ﬁ g 2.32).

1  General inspection and gait
Gait: Ask patient to walk a few metres, turn, and walk back 
to you. Note use of walking aids, symmetry, size of paces, arm 
swing. Ask patient to ‘walk heel-to-toe as if on a tightrope’ 
to exaggerate any instability. Ask patient to walk on tiptoes, 
then  on  heels.  Inability  to  walk  on  tiptoes  indicates  S1  or 
gastroc nemius lesion. Inability to walk on heels indicates L4,5 
lesion or foot drop.
Romberg’s test: Ask patient to stand unaided with arms by 
their sides and close their eyes (be ready to support them). 
If they sway/lose balance the test is positive and indicates 
posterior column disease/sensory ataxia.
Inspect:  Abnormal posturing, muscle wasting, fasciculation 
(LMN  lesion?), deformities of the foot (eg pes cavus of Frie-
dreich’s ataxia or Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease). Is one leg 
smaller than the other (old polio, infantile hemiplegia)?

2  Tone
Ask patient to ‘relax/go ﬂ oppy like a rag-doll’. Ask if they have 
any pain in feet/legs/hips before passively ﬂ exing and extend-
ing each limb while also internally and externally rotating. Hold 
the patient’s knee and roll it from side to side. Put your hand 
behind the knee and raise it quickly. The heel should lift slightly 
from the bed if tone is normal. Any spasticity/rigidity?
Clonus: Plantar ﬂ ex the foot then quickly dorsiﬂ ex and hold. 
More than 3 ‘beats’ of plantar ﬂ exion is sustained clonus and 
is abnormal. Clonus can also be elicited at the patella with 
rapid downward movement of patella. Hypertonia and clonus 
suggest an upper motor neuron lesion.

3  Reﬂ exes
For each reﬂ ex, test right, then left and compare. If absent, 
attempt to elicit with ‘reinforcement’. Decide whether reﬂ exes 
are  absent/present  (with  reinforcement)/normal/brisk/exag-
gerated.
  • Knee: (L3,4.) Strike on the patella tendon, just below the 

patella.

  • Ankle: (L5,S1.) Several accepted methods; ideally ask the 
patient to slightly bend the knee, then drop it laterally, 
grasp the foot and dorsiﬂ ex, then strike the Achilles 
tendon. If hip pain limits mobility, dorsiﬂ ex the foot with a 
straight leg and strike your hand, feeling for an ankle jerk.
  • Plantar reﬂ exes: (L5, S1, S2.) Stroke the patient’s sole with 
an orange stick or similar. The normal reﬂ ex is downward 
movement of the great toe. Babinski’s sign is positive if 
there is dorsiﬂ exion of the great toe (this is abnormal (up-
per motor neuron lesion) if patient age >6 months).

F

lo

(e

P

f

_OHCM_10e.indb   68

_OHCM_10e.indb   68

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
4  Power
Direct  patient  to  adopt  position  and  follow  the  following 
commands while you as the examiner resist movements as 
appropriate to grade power (p446). Test each muscle group 
bilaterally before moving on to the next position. See pp452–3 
for myotomes.
  • Hip ﬂ exion: ‘Keeping your leg straight, can you lift your 

leg off  the bed, don’t let me push it down.’

  • Hip extension: ‘And now using your leg, push my hand 

into the bed.’

  • Hip abduction: Position hands on outer thighs—‘push 

your legs out to the sides.’

  • Hip adduction: Position hands on inner thighs—‘and 

push your legs together.’

  • Knee ﬂ exion and extension: ‘Bend your knee and bring 
your heel to your bottom, don’t let me pull it away… and 
now kick out against me and push me away.’

  • Ankle plantar ﬂ exion: With your hand on the underside 
of the patient’s foot ask them to ‘bend your foot down, 
pushing my hand away.’

  • Ankle dorsiﬂ exion: Put your hand on the dorsum of the 
foot and ask them to ‘lift up your foot, point your toes at 
the ceiling, don’t let me push your foot down.’

69

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

5  Coordination
Heel–shin test: Using your ﬁ nger on the patient’s shin to 
demonstrate, instruct patient to ‘put your heel just below 
your knee then run it smoothly down your shin, lift it up 
and place it back on your knee, now run it down again’, etc. 
Repeat on the other side. Also, fast alternate foot tapping 
onto examiners’s hands with patient lying down.

6  Sensation

As upper limbs (p67).
  • Light touch: Lower limb dermatomes (p454).
  • Pin prick
  • Temperature
  • Vibration
  • Joint position sense: With the patient’s eyes closed grasp 
distal phalanx of the great toe at the sides. Stabilize the 
rest of the toe. Move the joint up and tell patient ‘this is 
up’, and down, saying ‘this is down’. Flex and extend the 
joint, stopping at intervals to ask whether the toe is up 
or down.

Fig  2.32  Dermatomes  of 
lower limb.

Reproduced from Harrison 
(ed) Revision Notes for MCEM 
Part A (2011), with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

Top tips
  • If you are limited for time, gait is the most useful test to start with.
  • Make sure you test each muscle group individually by stabilizing above the joint 

you are testing.

  • Test vibration by putting a buzzing tuning fork on the bony part of a joint (most 
distal point) with the patient’s eyes closed then ask them to tell you when the 
buzzing  stops  (pinch  the  tuning  fork  to  stop  it)  to  distinguish  vibration  from 
pressure sensation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   69

_OHCM_10e.indb   69

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
70

Cranial nerve examination

Approach to examining the cranial nerves Where 
is the lesion? Think systematically. Is it in the brain-
stem (eg MS) or outside, pressing on the brainstem? 
Is it the neuromuscular junction (myasthenia) or the 
muscles (eg a dystrophy)? Cranial nerves may be af-
fected singly or in groups. Face the patient (helps 
spot asymmetry). For causes of lesions see BOX ‘Caus-
es of cranial nerve lesions’.
  • I: Smell—test ability of each nostril (separately) to 

distinguish familiar smells, eg coff ee.

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Cranial nerve names
I olfactory
II optic
III oculomotor
IV trochlear
V1 ophthalmic division
V2 maxillary division
V3 mandibular division
VI abducens
VII facial
VIII vestibulo  cochlear
IX glossopharyngeal
X vagus
XI accessory
XII hypoglossal

  • II: Acuity—test each eye separately, and its correct-
ability with glasses or pin-hole; use Snellen chart, or 
the one inside the cover of this book. Visual ﬁ elds— 
compare with your own ﬁ elds or formally via perim-
etry testing. Any losses/inattention? Sites of lesions: 
OHCS p428. Pupils (p72)—size, shape, symmetry, reac-
tion to light (direct and consensual) or accommoda-
tion. Swinging light test for relative aff erent pupillary 
defect. Ophthalmoscopy (OHCS, p414)—best learnt from an ophthalmologist and dilat-
ing drops help! Darken the room, warn the patient you will need to get close to their 
face. Focus the lens on the optic disc (pale? swollen?). Follow vessels outwards to view 
each quadrant. If the view is obscured, examine the red reﬂ ex, with your focus on the 
margin of the pupil, to look for a cataract. Try to get a view of the fovea by asking the 
patient to look directly at the ophthalmoscope Pathology here needs prompt oph-
thalmic review. If in doubt, ask for slit lamp examination or photography of the retina.
  • III p, IV, & VI—eye movements. Ask the patient to keep their head still and follow 
your ﬁ nger as you trace an imaginary ‘H’. IIIrd nerve palsy—ptosis, large pupil, 
eye down and out. IVth nerve palsy—diplopia on looking down and in (often no-
ticed on descending stairs)—head tilting compensates for this (ocular torticollis). 
VIth nerve palsy—horizontal diplopia on looking out. Nystagmus is involuntary, 
often jerky, eye oscillations. Horizontal nystagmus is often due to a vestibular le-
sion (acute: nystagmus away from lesion; chronic: towards lesion), or cerebellar 
lesion (unilateral lesions cause nystagmus towards the aff ected side). If it is more 
in whichever eye is abducting, MS may be the cause (internuclear ophthalmoplegia, 
see ﬁ g 2.34). If also deafness/tinnitus, suspect a peripheral cause (eg VIIIth nerve 
lesion, barotrauma, Ménière’s, p462). If it varies with head position, suspect benign 
positional vertigo (p462). If it is up-and-down, ask a neurologist to review—upbeat 
nystagmus classically occurs with lesions in the midbrain or at the base of the 4th 
ventricle, downbeat nystagmus in foramen magnum lesions. Nystagmus lasting ≤2 
beats is normal, as is nystagmus at the extremes of gaze.

  • V: Motor palsy—‘Open your mouth’; jaw deviates to side of lesion, muscles of mas-
tication (temporalis, masseter and pterygoids). Sensory—check all three divisions. 
Consider corneal reﬂ ex (lost ﬁ rst).

  • VII: p Facial nerve lesions cause droop and weakness. As the forehead has bilateral 
representation in the brain, only the lower two-thirds is aff ected in UMN lesions, but 
all of one side of the face in LMN lesions. Ask to ‘raise your eyebrows’, ‘show me your 
teeth’, ‘puff  out your cheeks’. Test taste with salt/sweet solutions (supplies anterior 
two-thirds of tongue).

  • VIII: Hearing—p464. Ask to repeat a number whispered in an ear while you block 

the other. Perform Weber’s and Rinne’s tests (p464). Balance/vertigo—p462.

  • IX p & X: p Gag reﬂ ex—ask the patient to say ‘Ah’. Xth nerve lesions also cause the pal-
ate to be pulled to the normal side on saying ‘Ah’, uvula deviates away. Ask them to 
swallow a sip of water. Consider gag reﬂ ex—touch the back of the soft palate with 
an orange stick. The aff erent arm of the reﬂ ex involves IX; the eff erent arm involves X.
  • XI:  Trapezii—‘Shrug  your  shoulders’  against  resistance.  Sternocleidomastoid: 

‘Turn your head to the left/right’ against resistance.

  • XII: Tongue movement—the tongue deviates to the side of the lesion.

_OHCM_10e.indb   70

_OHCM_10e.indb   70

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
71

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Causes of cranial nerve lesions
Any cranial nerve may be aff ected by diabetes mellitus; stroke; MS; tumours; sar-
coidosis; vasculitis (p556), eg PAN (p556), SLE (p554); syphilis. Chronic menin gitis 
(malignant, TB, or fungal) tends to pick off  the lower cranial nerves one by one.
  • I: Trauma; respiratory tract infection; meningitis; frontal lobe tumour.
  • II: Field defects may start as small areas of visual loss (scotomas, eg in glaucoma). 
Monocular blindness—lesions of one eye or optic nerve eg MS, giant cell arteritis. 
Bilateral blindness4—any cause of mononeuritis, eg diabetes, MS; rarely methanol, 
neurosyphilis. Field  defects—bitemporal  hemianopia—optic chiasm compres-
sion, eg pituitary adenoma, craniopharyngioma, internal carotid artery aneurysm 
(ﬁ g 10.3, p451). Homonymous hemianopia—aff ects half the visual ﬁ eld contralat-
eral to the lesion in each eye. Lesions lie beyond the chiasm in the tracts, radiation, 
or occipital cortex, eg stroke, abscess, tumour. Optic neuritis (pain on moving 
eye, loss of central vision, relative aff erent pupillary defect, disc swelling from 
papillitis5)—causes demyelination (eg MS); rarely sinusitis, syphilis, collagen vas-
cular disorders. Ischaemic papillopathy—swelling of optic disc due to stenosis 
of the posterior ciliary artery (eg in giant cell arteritis). Papilloedema (bilateral-
ly swollen discs, ﬁ g 12.20, p560)—most commonly ICP (tumour, abscess, enceph-
alitis,  hydrocephalus,  idiopathic  intracranial  hypertension);  rarer:  retro-orbital 
lesion (eg cavernous sinus thrombosis, p480). Optic atrophy (pale optic discs 
and reduced acuity)—MS; frontal tumours; Friedreich’s ataxia; retinitis pigmen-
tosa; syphilis; glaucoma; Leber’s optic atrophy; chronic optic nerve compression.
  • III: c Alone c—‘medical’ causes (pupillary sparing): diabetes; HTN; giant cell arteri-
tis; syphilis; idiopathic. ‘Surgical’ causes (early pupil involvement due to external 
compression of nerve damaging parasympathetic ﬁ bres): posterior communi-
cating artery aneurysm (+ surgery) ICP (if uncal herniation through the tento-
rium compresses the nerve); tumours.

  • IV:c Alone—rare and usually due to trauma to the orbit.
  • V: c Sensory—trigeminal neuralgia (pain but no sensory loss, p457); herpes zoster, 

nasopharyngeal cancer, acoustic neuroma (p462). Motor—rare.

  • VI: c Alone—MS, Wernicke’s encephalopathy, false localizing sign in ICP, pontine 

stroke (presents with ﬁ xed small pupils ± quadriparesis).

  • VII: LMN—Bell’s palsy (p500), polio, otitis media, skull fracture; cerebellopontine 
angle tumours, eg acoustic neuroma, malignant parotid tumours, herpes zoster 
(Ramsay Hunt syndrome p501, OHCS p652). UMN—(spares the forehead, because 
of its bilateral cortical representation), stroke, tumour.

  • VIII: (p462 & p464.) Noise damage, Paget’s disease, Ménière’s disease, herpes 

zoster, acoustic neuroma, brainstem CVA, drugs (eg aminoglycosides).

  • IX, X, XI: Trauma, brainstem lesions, neck tumours.
  • XII: Rare. Polio, syringomyelia, tumour, stroke, bulbar palsy, trauma, TB.
Groups of cranial nerves:
VIII, then V, VI, IX, & X: cerebellopontine angle tumours, eg acoustic neuroma (p462; 
facial weakness is not a prominent sign). III, IV & VI: stroke, tumours, Wernicke’s 
enceph alopathy; aneurysms, MS. III, IV, Va, & VI: cavernous sinus thrombosis, supe-
rior orbital ﬁ ssure lesions (Tolosa–Hunt syndrome, OHCS p654). IX, X, & XI: jugular 
foramen lesion. : myasthenia gravis, muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, 
mononeuritis multiplex (p502).

Top tips
If the patient is able to shake their head, there is no meningism.

4  Remember the commonest cause of monocular or binocular blindness is not a cranial nerve lesion but 
a problem with the eye itself (cataracts, retinal problems). Neurological disorders more commonly cause 
loss of part of the visual ﬁ eld.
5  Unilateral  disc  swelling  =  papillitis,  bilateral  papillitis/disc  swelling  =  papilloedema.  Check  both  eyes! 
c= structures passing through the cavernous sinus; see BOX ‘Psychiatric symptoms’, p89. NB: Va is the only 
division of V to do so.
p= Remember that these cranial nerves carry parasympathetic ﬁ bres. Sympathetic ﬁ bres originate from 
the thoracic chain and run with the arterial supply to distribute about the body (see also OHCS, ﬁ g 9.6, p621).

_OHCM_10e.indb   71

_OHCM_10e.indb   71

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
72

Cranial nerve lesions of the eye

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Pupillary abnormalities
Key  questions:  • Equal,  central,  circular,  dilated,  or  constricted?  • React  to  light, 
directly and consensually? • Constrict normally on convergence/accommodation?
Irregular pupils: Anterior uveitis (iritis), trauma to the eye, syphilis.
Dilated pupils: CN III lesions (inc. ICP, p830) and mydriatic drugs. Always ask: is 
this pupil dilated, or is it the other that is constricted?
Constricted pupils: Old age, sympathetic nerve damage (Horner’s, p702, and ptosis, 
p73), opiates, miotics (pilocarpine drops for glaucoma), pontine damage.
Unequal pupils (anisocoria): May be due to unilateral lesion, eye-drops, eye surgery, 
syphilis, or Holmes–Adie pupil. Some inequality is normal.
Light reaction: Test: cover one eye and shine light into the other obliquely. Both 
pupils should constrict, one by direct, other by consensual light reﬂ ex (ﬁ g 2.33). The 
lesion site is deduced by knowing the pathway: from the retina the message passes 
up the optic nerve (CNII) to the superior colliculus (midbrain) and thence to the CNIII 
nuclei on both sides. The IIIrd cranial nerve causes pupillary constriction. If a light in 
one eye causes only contralateral constriction, the defect is ‘eff erent’, as the aff erent 
pathways from the retina being stimulated must be intact. Test for relative afferent 
pupillary defect: move torch quickly from pupil to pupil. If there has been incomplete 
damage to the aff erent pathway, the aff ected pupil will paradoxically dilate when 
light is moved from the normal eye to the abnormal eye. This is because, in the face 
of reduced aff erent input from the aff ected eye, the consensual pupillary relaxation 
response from the normal eye predominates. This is the Marcus Gunn sign, and may 
occur after apparent complete recovery from the initial lesion.
Reaction to accommodation/convergence: If the patient ﬁ rst looks at a distant 
object and then at the examiner’s ﬁ nger held a few inches away, the eyes will con-
verge and the pupils constrict. Aff erent ﬁ bres in each optic nerve pass to the lateral 
geniculate bodies. Impulses then pass to the pre-tectal nucleus and then to the para-
sympathetic nuclei of the IIIrd cranial nerves, causing pupillary constriction.
  • Holmes–Adie (myotonic) pupil: The aff ected pupil is normally moderately dilated 
and is poorly reactive to light, if at all. It is slowly reactive to accommodation; wait 
and watch carefully: it may eventually constrict more than a normal pupil. It is often 
associated with diminished or absent ankle and knee reﬂ exes, in which case the 
Holmes–Adie syndrome is present. Usually a benign incidental ﬁ nding. Rare causes: 
Lyme disease, syphilis, parvovirus B19, HSV, autoimmunity. >.

  • Argyll Robertson pupil: This occurs in neurosyphilis. The pupil is constricted and 
unreactive  to  light,  but  reacts  to  accommodation.  Other  possible  causes:  Lyme 
disease;  HIV;  zoster;  diabetes  mellitus;  sarcoidosis;  MS;  paraneoplastic;  B12.  The 
iris may be patchily atrophied, irregular, and depigmented. The lesion site is not 
always near the Edinger–Westphal nucleus or even in the midbrain. Pseudo-Argyll 
Robertson pupils occur in Parinaud’s syndrome (p708).

  • Hutchinson pupil: This is the sequence of events resulting from rapidly rising uni-
lateral intracranial pressure (eg in intracerebral haemorrhage). The pupil on the 
side of the lesion ﬁ rst constricts then widely dilates. The other pupil then goes 
through the same sequence. See p830.

Fig 2.33  Light reﬂ ex. Action potentials go 
along  optic  nerve  (red),  traversing  optic 
chiasm, passing synapses at pre-tectal nu-
cleus, en route to Edinger–Westphal nuclei 
of  CNIII.  These  send  ﬁ bres  to  both  irises’ 
ciliary  muscles  (so  both  pupils  constrict) 
via  ciliary  ganglion  (also  relays  accom-
modation  and  corneal  sensation,  and  gets 
sympathetic  roots  from  C8–T2,  carrying 
ﬁ bres to dilate pupil).

_OHCM_10e.indb   72

_OHCM_10e.indb   72

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Fig  2.34    Internuclear  ophthal-
moplegia  (INO)  and  its  causes.  To 
produce  synchronous  eye  move-
ments,  cranial  nerves  III,  IV,  and 
VI  communicate  through  medial 
long it udinal fasciculus in midbrain. 
In  INO,  a  lesion  disrupts  commu n-
i cation,  causing  weakness  in  ad-
duction  of  the  ipsilat eral  eye  with 
nystagmus of the contralateral eye 
only when abducting. There may be 
incomplete or slow abduction of the 
ipsilateral  eye  during  lateral  gaze. 
Convergence  is  preserved.  Causes 
MS or vascular (rarely: HIV; syphilis; 
Lyme  disease;  brainstem  tumours; 
phenothiazine toxicity).

73

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Ptosis
Drooping of the upper eyelid. Best observed with patient sitting up, with head held 
by examiner. Oculomotor nerve (CN III) innervates main muscle concerned (levator 
palpebrae), but nerves from the cervical sympathetic chain innervate superior tar-
sal muscle, and a lesion of these nerves causes mild ptosis which can be overcome 
on looking up. Causes:

1      CN III lesions cause unilateral complete ptosis: look for other evidence of a 
CN III lesion: ophth almoplegia with ‘down and out’ deviation of the eye, pupil 
dil ated and unreactive to light or accommodation. If eye pain too, suspect 
inﬁ ltration (eg by lymphoma or sarcoidosis). If  T° or consciousness, suspect 
infection (any tick bites?).

2      Sympathetic paralysis usually causes unilateral partial ptosis. Look for other 
evidence of a sympathetic lesion, as in Horner’s syndrome (p702): constricted 
pupil = miosis, lack of sweating on same side of the face (=anhidrosis).

3      Myopathy, eg dystrophia myotonica, myasthenia gravis (cause bilateral partial 

ptosis).

4      Congenital; usually partial and without other CNS signs.

Visual loss
Get ophthalmology help. See OHCS p434–p455. Consider:
  • Is the eye red? (Glaucoma, uveitis p561.)
  • Pain? Giant cell arteritis: severe temporal headache, jaw claudication, scalp ten-

derness, ESR:  urgent steroids (p556). Optic neuritis: eg in MS.

  • Is the cornea cloudy: corneal ulcer (OHCS p435), glaucoma (OHCS p433)?
  • Is there a contact lens problem (infection)?
  • Any ﬂ ashes/ﬂ oaters? (TIA, migraine, retinal detachment?)
  • Is there a visual ﬁ eld problem (stroke, space-occupying lesion, glaucoma)?
  • Are there any focal CNS signs?
  • Any valvular heart disease/carotid bruits (emboli)? Hyperlipidaemia (p690)?
  • Is there a relative aff erent pupillary defect (p72)?
  • Any past history of trauma, migraine, hypertension, cerebrovascular disease, MS, 

diabetes or connective tissue disease?

  • Any distant signs: eg HIV (causes retinitis), SLE, sarcoidosis?
Sudden:  • Acute  glaucoma  • Retinal  detachment  • Vitreous  haemorrhage  (eg 
in  diabetic  proliferative  retinopathy)  • Central  retinal  artery  or  vein  occlusion 
• Migraine • CNS: TIA (amaurosis fugax), stroke, space-occupying lesion • Optic neu-
ritis (eg MS) • Temporal arteritis • Drugs: quinine/methanol • Pituitary apoplexy.
Gradual: • Optic atrophy • Chronic glaucoma • Cataracts • Macular degeneration 
• Tobacco amblyopia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   73

_OHCM_10e.indb   73

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
74

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Musculoskeletal hand examination 1
Begin by introducing yourself, obtaining consent to examine and position the patient 
appropriately. Expose the arms, then ask the patient to rest their hands on a pillow. 
Start by examining the dorsal surface and then turn the hands over. Always ask 
about pain or tender areas. Follow the ‘look, ask the patient to move, then feel’ to 
avoid causing pain.

Skin

On both the palm and the dorsum start by 
inspecting the skin for:

1      Colour—pigmentation of creases, jaundice, 

palmar erythema (ﬁ g 2.44).

2      Consistency—tight (sclerodactyly), thick 

(DM, acromegaly) (ﬁ g 2.39).

3      Characteristic lesions—pulp infarcts, 

rashes, purpura, spider naevi, telangiecta-
sia, tophi (ﬁ g 2.35), scars (eg carpal tunnel 
release).

Fig 2.35  Gouty tophi.

Nails
Look for the same skin changes 
as  the  palm,  plus  tendon  xan-
thomata,  plaques,  and  joint  re-
placement  scars,  and  examine 
the nails for:
  • Pitting and onycholysis (p76).
  • Clubbing (p77).
  • Nail fold infarcts and splinter 

haemorrhages.

  • Other lesions, eg Beau’s lines 
(ﬁ g 2.41, p76), koilonychia, 
leuconychia (ﬁ g 2.36).

Fig 2.36  Leuconychia.

Muscles
Examine the muscles for wasting and fascicu-
lations; on the dorsal surface look for wasting, 
particularly  of  dorsal  interossei.  On  the  palm 
look particularly at the thenar and hypothenar 
eminences.
  • Thenar wasting (ﬁ g 2.37) = median nerve 

lesion.

  • Generalized wasting, particularly of the 

interossei on the dorsum, but sparing of the 
thenar eminence = ulnar nerve lesion.

Also  look  for  Dupuytren's  contracture  and 
perform  Tinel's  test  (percuss  over  the  distal 
skin crease of the wrist). Phalen's test (patient 
holds dorsal surfaces of both hands together 
for 60 seconds). Both tests are positive if tin-
gling  reported,  suggesting  carpal  tunnel  syn-
drome.

Fig 2.37  Thenar wasting.

_OHCM_10e.indb   74

_OHCM_10e.indb   74

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Fig 2.38  Osteoarthritis.

Fig 2.39  Sclerosis.

75

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Joints
Examine for acute inﬂ ammation (swol-
len,  red  joints)  as  well  as  the  charac-
teristic deformities of chronic arthritis, 
eg rheumatoid, osteoarthritis (ﬁ g 2.38).
  • Ulnar deviation at the wrist.
  • Z deformity of the thumb.
  • Swan-neck (ﬂ exed DIP, hyperextended 

PIP—ﬁ g 12.2, p540).

  • Boutonnière (hyperextended DIP, 

ﬂ exed PIP).

  • Heberden’s nodes (DIP joints, p77).
  • Bouchard’s nodes (PIP joints).

Move and feel
By this point, you should know the likely 
diagnosis,  so  assess  neurological  func-
tion looking at power, function, and sen-
sation:
  • Wrist and forearm: Extension (prayer 
position)  and  ﬂ exion  (reverse  prayer), 
supination  and  pronation.  Look  at  the 
elbows.

  • Small muscles: Pincer grip, power grip 
(squeeze my two ﬁ ngers), abduction of 
the thumb, abduction (spread your ﬁ n-
gers), and adduction (grip this piece of 
paper between your ﬁ ngers) of the ﬁ n-
gers. NB Froment's sign = ﬂ exion of the 
thumb during grip as ulnar nerve lesion 
prevents adduction (p453).

  • Function: Write a sentence, undo a but-

ton, pick up a coin.

  • Sensation:  Test  little  ﬁ nger  (ulnar), 
index  ﬁ nger  (median),  and  anatomi-
cal snuff box (radial) using light touch/
pinprick.

When  you  have  clinched  the  diagnosis 
and functional status, examine each joint, 
palpating  for  tenderness,  eff usions,  and 
crepitus. Test sensation (see p67) and ex-
amine the elbows. Consider examination 
of upper limbs and face.

Top tips
  • Cross your ﬁ ngers before the patient grips them, it hurts less!
  • Don’t forget to palpate the radial pulse.
  • Don’t forget to look at the elbows for plaques of psoriasis and rheumatoid nodules.

_OHCM_10e.indb   75

_OHCM_10e.indb   75

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
76

Musculoskeletal hand examination 2

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

The hands can give you a wealth of information about a patient. Shaking hands can 
tell you about thyroid disease (warm, sweaty, tremor), anxiety (cold, sweaty), and 
neurological disease (myotonic dystrophy patients have diffi  culty relaxing their grip, 
a weak grip may suggest muscle wasting or peripheral neuropathy). The nails and 
skin can inform about systemic disease:
Nail abnormalities
  • Koilonychia (spoon-shaped nails, ﬁ g 2.40) suggests 
iron  deﬁ ciency,  haemochromatosis,  infection  (eg 
fungal), endocrine disorders (eg acromegaly, hypo-
thyroidism), or malnutrition.

  • Onycholysis (detachment of the nail from the nail-
bed) is seen with hyper thyroidism, fungal infection, 
and psoriasis.

  • Beau’s lines (ﬁ g 2.41) are transverse furrows from 
temporary arrest of nail growth at times of biologi-
cal stress: severe infection. Nails grow at ~0.1mm/d, 
the furrow’s distance from the cuticle allows dating 
of the stress.

  • Mees’ lines are single white transverse bands clas-
sically seen in arsenic poisoning, chronic kidney dis-
ease, and carbon monoxide poisoning among others.
  • Muehrcke’s  lines  are  paired  white  parallel  trans-
verse  bands  (without  furrowing  of  the  nail  itself, 
distinguishing them from Beau’s lines) seen, eg, in 
chronic hypoalbuminaemia, Hodgkin’s disease, pel-
lagra (p268), chronic kidney disease.

  • Terry’s  nails:  Proximal  portion  of  nail  is  white/
pink, nail tip is red/brown (causes include cirrhosis, 
chronic kidney disease, congestive cardiac failure).

  • Pitting is seen in psoriasis and alopecia areata.
  • Splinter haemorrhages (ﬁ g 2.42) are ﬁ ne longitudi-
nal haemorrhagic streaks (under the nails), which in 
the febrile patient may suggest infective endocardi-
tis. They may be microemboli, or be normal—eg due 
to gardening.

  • Nail-fold infarcts: Embolic, typically seen in vascu-

litic disorders (OHCS, p452).

  • Nail clubbing See p77.
  • Chronic  paronychia  is  a  chronic  infection  of  the 
nail-fold and presents as a painful swollen nail with 
intermittent discharge (ﬁ g 2.43).

Skin changes
  • Palmar erythema (ﬁ g 2.44) is associated with cir-
rhosis,  pregnancy,  hyperthyroidism,  rheumatoid 
arthritis, polycythaemia; also chronic liver disease—
via  inactivation  of  vasoactive  endotoxins  by  the 
liver.  Also  chemotherapy-induced  palmar/plantar 
erythrodysaesthesia.

  • Pallor of the palmar creases suggests anaemia.
  • Pigmentation  of  the  palmar  creases  is  normal  in 
people  of  African-Caribbean  or  Asian  origin  but 
is also seen in Addison’s disease and Nelson’s syn-
drome (increased ACTH after removal of the adrenal 
glands in Cushing’s disease).15

  • Gottron’s  papules  (purple  rash  on  the  knuckles) 
with dilated end-capillary loops at the nail fold sug-
gests dermatomyositis (p552). 

Fig 2.40  Koilonychia.

Fig 2.41  Beau’s lines, here due 
to chemotherapy, a new line is 
seen with each cycle. See p525.

Fig  2.42  Splinter  haemor-
rhages.

Fig 2.43  Paronychia.

Reproduced from Burge et al. 
Oxford Handbook of Medical 
Dermatology 2016, with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

Fig 2.44   Palmar erythema.

_OHCM_10e.indb   76

_OHCM_10e.indb   76

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
77

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Nodules and contractures
  • Dupuytren’s contracture (see ﬁ g 2.26, p60) ﬁ brosis 
and contrac ture of palmar fascia, p698) is seen in 
liver disease, trauma, epilepsy, and ageing.

  • Look  for  Heberden’s  (DIP)  ﬁ g  2.45  and  Bouchard’s 
(PIP)  ‘nodes’—osteophytes  (bone  over-growth  at  a 
joint) seen with osteoarthritis.

Fig 2.45  Heberden’s (DIP).
Reproduced from Watts et al. (eds) 
Oxford Textbook of Rheumatology 
(2013), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Clubbing
Fingernails (± toenails) have increased curvature in all directions and loss of the 
angle between nail and nail fold and feel boggy (ﬁ gs 2.46, 2.47). Pathogenesis is 
unclear although the platelet theory was developed in 1987.16 Megakaryocytes are 
normally fragmented into platelets in the lungs, and the original theory was that 
any  disruption  to  normal  pulmonary  circulation  (inﬂ ammation,  cancer,  cardiac 
right-to-left shunting) would allow large megakaryocytes into the systemic cir-
culation. They become lodged in the capillaries of the ﬁ ngers and toes, releasing 
platelet-derived growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor, which lead 
to tissue growth, vascular permeability, and recruitment of inﬂ ammatory cells. 
Evidence showing platelet microthrombi in clubbed ﬁ ngers, and high levels of PDGF 
and VEGF in patients with hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, support the theory. This 
does not explain the changes in patients with unilateral clubbing, usually seen in 
neurological disorders.
Causes
Thoracic:
  • Bronchial  cancer  (clubbing  is 
twice as common in women); 
us u ally not small cell cancer

GI:
  • Inﬂ ammatory bowel dis-
ease (especially Crohn’s)

Cardiovascular:
  • Cyanotic 

cong enital heart 
disease

  • Cirrhosis
  • GI lymphoma
  • Malabsorption, eg coeliac.

  • Chronic lung suppuration:
  • Empyema, abscess
  • Bronchiectasis
  • Cystic ﬁ brosis
  • Fibrosing alveolitis
  • Mesothelioma
  • TB.
Unilateral clubbing:
  • Hemiplegia
  • Vascular lesions, eg upper-limb artery aneurysm, Takayasu’s arteritis, brachial 

Rare:
  • Familial
  • Thyroid acropachy (p562).

  • Endocarditis
  • Atrial myxoma
  • Aneurysms
  • Infected grafts.

arteriovenous malformations (including iatrogenic— haemodialysis ﬁ stulas).

Fig 2.46  Finger clubbing.

Fig 2.47  Testing for ﬁ nger clubbing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   77

_OHCM_10e.indb   77

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
78

The peripheral vascular system: examination

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Arterial
If limb is pale, pulseless, painful, paralysed, paraesthetic, and ‘perishingly cold’ this 
is acute ischaemia and is a surgical emergency (see p595 and p657).

1      Inspection: Look for scars of previous surgery and signs of peripheral arterial 
disease; loss of hair, pallor, shiny skin, cyanosis, dry skin, scaling, deformed toe-
nails, ulcers, gangrene. Be sure to inspect the pressure points, ie between the 
toes and under the heel.

2      Palpation: Skin temperature will be cool in peripheral arterial disease. Is there 
a level above which it is warm? Delayed capillary reﬁ ll (>2s) also indicates arte-
rial disease. Are peripheral pulses palpable or not? ‘If you cannot count it, you 
are not feeling it.’ Note down on a quick stick-man diagram where they become 
palpable. Check for atrial ﬁ brillation or other arrhythmias, as these can be the 
cause of embolic disease. Palpate for an enlarged abdominal aorta and attempt 
to assess size. (Though don’t press too ﬁ rmly!)  An expansile pulsatile mass 
in the presence of abdominal symptoms is a ruptured aneurysm until proven 
otherwise.

3      Auscultation: The presence of bruits suggests arterial disease. Listen over the 

major arteries—carotids, abdominal aorta, renal arteries, iliac femorals.

4      Special tests: Buerger’s angle is that above the horizontal plane which leads to 
development of pallor (<20° indicates severe ischaemia). Buerger’s sign is the 
sequential change in colour from white to pink, upon return to the dependent 
position; if the limbs become ﬂ ushed red (reactive hyperaemia) this is indicative 
of more severe disease.

5      Complete your examination: measure ABPI (p656), US Doppler assessment, and 

a neurological examination of the lower limbs.

Venous
(See also p658.)

1      Inspection: Look for any varicosities and decide whether they are the long sa-
phenous vein (medial), short saphenous vein (posterior lateral, below the knee), 
or from the calf perforators (usually few varicosities but commonly show skin 
changes). Ulcers around the  medial malleolus are more suggestive of  venous 
disease, whereas those at the pressure points suggest arterial pathology. Brown 
haemosiderin deposits result from venous hypertension. There may also be atro-
phy and loss of skin elasticity (lipodermatosclerosis) in venous disease.

2      Palpation: Warm varicose veins may indicate infection. Are they tender? Firm, 
tender varicosities suggests thrombosis. Palpate the saphenofemoral junction 
(SFJ) for a saphena varix which displays a cough impulse. Similarly, incompetence 
at the saphenopopliteal junction (SPJ) may be felt as a cough impulse. If ulcera-
tion is present, it is prudent to palpate the arterial pulses to rule out arterial 
disease.

3      Tap test: A transmitted percussion impulse from the lower limit of the varicose 
vein to the saphenofemoral junction demonstrates incompetence of superﬁ cial 
valves.

4      Auscultation: Bruits over the varicosities means there is an arteriovenous mal-

formation.

5      Doppler: Test for the level of reﬂ ux. On squeezing the leg distal to placement of 
the probe you should only hear one ‘whoosh’ if the valves are competent at the 
level of probe placement.

6      Trendelenburg’s test assesses if the SFJ valve is competent. Doppler USS has largely 
consigned  this  and  other  examination  methods  (eg  Tourniquet  and  Perthes’ 
test) to the history books.

7      Complete examination: examine the abdomen, pelvis in females, and external 

genitalia in males (for masses).

_OHCM_10e.indb   78

_OHCM_10e.indb   78

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
79

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Arterial

1  General inspection Introduction, consent, patient sitting back at 45°. Inspect 
skin (hair loss, etc.). Look between toes and lift up heels to inspect for ulcers.

2 Palpation
  • Temperature: Bilaterally in thighs, legs, and feet.
  • Capillary reﬁ ll: Press/squeeze great toe until 
blanches, release, and measure time for colour 
to return (normal <2s).

  • Peripheral pulses: Radial, bra chial (medial to 
biceps tendon), carotid, femoral (mid-inguinal 
point), popliteal (ﬂ ex patient’s knees slightly, 
press into centre of popliteal fossa; ﬁ g 2.48), 
posterior tibial (just posterior & inferior to 
medial malleolus) and dorsalis pedis (between 
bases of 1st & 2nd metatarsals, lateral to exten-
sor hallucis longus); assess whether palpable 
bilaterally. Detect rate and rhythm. For brachial 
and carotid, determine volume and character.

  • Abdominal aorta: Palpate midline above 

umbilicus; position ﬁ ngers either side of outer-
most palpable margins (ﬁ g 2.49).

Fig  2.48  Peripheral  pulses:  pop-
liteal.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. (eds). 
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Examina-
tion and Practical Skills (2014), with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

3  Auscultation for carotid, femoral, renal iliac, 

and aortic bruits.

Fig 2.49  Pulses: abdominal aorta.
(a) Expansile (aneurysm?) 
(b) Transmitted.

4 Special tests
Buerger’s test: Lift both legs to 45° above the horizontal, 
supporting at heels. Allow a minute for legs to become 
pale. If they do, ask patient to sit up and swing around 
to lower legs to ground—observe colour change.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. 
(eds). Oxford Handbook of Clinical 
Examination and Practical Skills 
(2014), with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

5 Complete examination
Doppler probe to detect pulses and measure ankle –brachial pressure index; con-
duct neurological examination of lower limbs.

Venous

1  Inspection Introduction, consent. Inspect, initially with patient standing, for 

varicosities and skin changes.

2 Palpation •Temperature of varicosities. •Ask patient to cough while you 

palpate for impulse at SFJ and SPJ.

3  Tap test Percuss lower limit of varicosity and feel for impulse at SFJ.

4 Auscultation Listen for bruits over any varicosities.

5 Doppler Place probe over SFJ, squeeze calf and listen. Repeat with probe at SPJ.

6 Tourniquet test Elevate leg and massage veins to empty varicosities. Apply 

tourniquet to upper thigh. Ask patient to stand. If not controlled, repeat, placing 
tourniquet below knee.

7  Finish with examinations of abdomen; rectum; pelvis (); genitals ().

_OHCM_10e.indb   79

_OHCM_10e.indb   79

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
80

The genitourinary system: history

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

See table 2.11 for direct questions to ask regarding presenting symptoms.
Detecting outﬂ ow obstruction (See ‘Irritative or obstructive bladder symptoms’ 
later in topic.) Eg prostatic hyperplasia; stricture; stone. Ask about LUTS (lower uri-
nary tract symptoms).
  • On trying to pass water, is there delay before you start? (Hesitancy)
  • Does  the  ﬂ ow  stop  and  start?  Do  you  go  on  dribbling  when  you  think  you’ve 

stopped? (Terminal dribbling)

  • Is your stream getting weaker? (Poor stream)
  • Is your stream painful and slow/‘drop-by-drop’? (eg from bladder stone)
  • Do you feel the bladder is not empty after passing water? i
  • Do you ever pass water when you do not want to? (Incontinence—p648)
  • On feeling an urge to pass water, do you have to go at once? (Urgency)i
  • Do you urinate often at night? (Nocturia) i In the day? (Frequency)i How often?
Past history Renal colic, urinary tract infection, diabetes, BP, gout, analgesic use 
(p318), previous operations.
Drug history Anticholinergics, prophylactic antibiotics.
Family history Prostate carcinoma? Renal disease?
Social history Smoking, sexual history.
Table 2.11  Presenting symptoms and questions to ask
Presenting symptoms
Dysuria
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS)
Loin/scrotal pain
Haematuria (p293 and p647)
Urethral/vaginal discharge (p413)
Sex problems; dyspareunia (OHCS 
p310)
Menses (OHCS p250)

Direct questions
Pain: SOCRATES (p36). Fever? Sexual history. 
Abnormal-looking urine? Previous problems.

Must rule out testicular torsion (p652).

Ask about menarche, menopause, length of 
periods, amount, pain? Intermenstrual loss? 1st 
day of last menstrual period (LMP)?

Dysuria
Be sure you mean the same as your patient and colleagues, as dysuria refers to 
both painful micturition (‘uralgia') and diffi  cult micturition (voiding difﬁ culty, p81). 
Uralgia is typically from urethral, bladder, or vaginal inﬂ ammation (UTI; perfumed 
bath products, spermicides, urethral syndrome, p300). If post menopausal, look for a 
urethral caruncle—ﬂ eshy outgrowth of distal urethral mucosa, 1cm, typically origi-
nating from the posterior urethral lip. Also think of prostatitis, STI/urethritis (p413), 
vaginitis, and vulvitis. Rare causes: Stones, urethral lesions (eg car cinoma, lympho-
ma, papilloma), post-partum complications (eg retained products of conception).
Voiding diffi  culty is a sign of outﬂ ow obstruction, eg from an enlarged prostate, 
or urethral stricture (commonly post-traumatic, post-gonococcal). Other features: 
straining to void, poor stream, urinary retention, and incontinence. Stran gury is 
urethral pain, usually referred from the bladder base, causing a constant dist res sing 
desire to urinate even if there is little urine to void. Causes: Stones, catheters, cys-
titis, prostat itis, bladder neoplasia, rarely: bladder endometriosis, schistosomiasis.

Frequency
Aim to diff erentiate urine production (eg diabetes mellitus and insipidus, polydip-
sia, diuretics, alcohol, renal tubular disease, adrenal insuffi  ciency) from frequent 
passage of small amounts of urine (eg in cystitis, urethritis, neurogenic bladder), 
or bladder com pression or outﬂ ow obstruction (pregnancy, bladder tumour, en-
larged prostate).

i = irritative (or ‘ﬁ lling’) symptoms: they can be caused by, for example, UTI, as well as obstructions.

_OHCM_10e.indb   80

_OHCM_10e.indb   80

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
81

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Oliguria/anuria
Oliguria is deﬁ ned as a urine output of <400mL/24h or <0.5mL/kg/h and can be a sign 
of shock (eg post-op, p576) or acute kidney injury: causes: p298. Anuria is deﬁ ned as 
<50mL/24h. In a catheterized patient with sudden anuria consider catheter blockage, 
with slow decline of oliguria to anuria renal dysfunction is more likely.
Polyuria
Increased urine volume, eg >3L/24h. Causes: Over-enthusiastic IV ﬂ uid therapy; diabe-
tes mellitus & insipidus (diabetes is Greek for fountain);Ca2+; psycho genic polydipsia/
PIP syndrome (p240); polyuric phase of recovering acute tubular necrosis.
Irritative or obstructive bladder symptoms
(See also p642.) Symptoms of prostate enlargement are miscalled ‘prost atism’; it is 
better to talk about irritative or obstructive bladder symptoms, as bladder neck 
obstruction or a stricture may be the cause.

1      Irritative bladder symptoms: Urgency, dysuria, frequency, nocturia 6 (the last 

two are also associated with causes of polyuria).

2      Obstructive symptoms: Reduced size and force of urinary stream, hesitancy and 
interruption of stream during voiding and terminal dribbling—the usual cause is 
enlargement of the prostate (prostatic hyperplasia), but other causes include 
a urethral stricture, tumour, urethral valves, or bladder neck contracture. The 
maximum ﬂ ow rate of urine is normally ~18–30mL/s.

Terminal dribbling
Dribbling at the end of urination, often seen in conjunction with incontinence follow-
ing incomplete urination, associated with prostatism.
Urinary changes
Cloudy urine suggests pus (UTI) but is often normal phosphate precipitation in an 
alkaline urine. Pneumaturia (bubbles in urine as it is passed). Occurs with UTI due to 
gas-forming organisms or may signal an enterovesical (bowel–bladder) ﬁ stula from 
diverticulitis, Crohn’s disease or neoplastic disease of the bowel. Nocturia occurs 
with ‘irritative bladder’, diabetes mellitus, UTI, and reversed diurnal rhythm (seen in 
renal and cardiac failure). Haematuria (RBC in urine) is due to neoplasia or glomeru-
lonephritis (p310) until proven otherwise. Rule out UTI.
Voiding diffi  culty
This includes poor ﬂ ow, straining to void, hesitancy, intermittent stream, incontinence 
(eg overﬂ ow), retention (acute or chronic), incomplete emptying (±UTI from residual 
urine). Remember faecal impaction as a cause of retention with overﬂ ow. Causes: 
Obstructive: prostatic hyperplasia, early oedema after bladder neck repair, uterine 
prolapse,  retroverted  gravid  uterus,  ﬁ broids,  ovarian  cysts,  urethral  foreign  body, 
ectopic ureterocele, bladder polyp, or cancer. Bladder overdistension—eg after epi-
dural for childbirth. Detrusor weakness or myopathy causes incomplete emptying 
+ dribbling overﬂ ow incontinence (do cystometry/electro myography; causes include 
neurological disease and interstitial cystitis (OHCS p306); it may lead to a contr acted 
bladder, eg requiring substitution enterocystoplasty). Drugs: epidural anaesthesia; 
tricyclics, anticholinergics. CNS: suprapontine (stroke); cord lesions (cord injury, mul-
tiple sclerosis); peripheral nerve (prolapsed disc, diabetic or other neuropathy); or 
reﬂ ex, due to pain (eg with herpes infections).

6  In the elderly, nocturia (1–2/night) may be ‘normal’ because of: i) loss of ability to concentrate urine; ii) pe-
ripheral oedema ﬂ uid returns to the circulation at night; iii) circadian rhythms may be lost; iv) less sleep is 
needed and waking may be interpreted as a need to void (a conditioned Pavlovian response).

_OHCM_10e.indb   81

_OHCM_10e.indb   81

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
82

The breast: history

See table 2.12 for direct questions to ask regarding presenting symptoms.
Table 2.12  Presenting symptoms and questions to ask
Presenting symptoms
Breast lump

Direct questions
Previous lumps? Family history? Pain? Nipple 
discharge? Nipple inversion? Skin changes? Change 
in size related to menstrual cycle? Number of 
pregnancies? First/last/latest period? Postnatal? 
Breast feeding? Drugs (eg HRT)? Consider metastatic 
disease (weight loss, breathlessness, back pain, 
abdominal mass?)
SOCRATES (p36). Bilateral/unilateral? Rule out cardiac 
chest pain (p94 & p784). History of trauma? Any 
mass? Related to menstrual cycle?
Amount? Nature (colour? consistency? any blood?)

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Breast pain
(see BOX ‘Breast pain’)

Nipple discharge
(see BOX ‘Nipple discharge’)

Past  history  Any  previous  lumps  and/or  malignancies.  Previous  mammograms, 
clinical examinations of the breast, USS, ﬁ ne-needle aspirate (FNA)/core biopsies.
Drug history Ask speciﬁ cally about HRT and the Pill.
Family history See p520.
Social history Try to gain an impression of support network if suspect malignancy.

Breast pain
Is it premenstrual (cyclical mastalgia, OHCS p254)? Breast cancer (refer, eg, for 
mammography if needed)? If non-malignant and non-cyclical, think of:
  • Tietze’s syndrome  (costochondritis plus swelling of the costal cartilage)
  • Bornholm disease/Devil’s grip (Coxsackie B virus, causing chest and abdominal 
pain, which may be mistaken for cardiac pain or an acute surgical abdomen. It 
resolves within ~2 weeks)

  • angina
  • gallstones
  • lung disease
  • thoracic outlet syndrome
  • oestrogens/HRT.
If none of the above, wearing a ﬁ rm bra all day may help, as may NSAIDS.

Nipple discharge
Causes: Duct ectasia (green/brown/red, often multiple ducts and bilateral), intra-
ductal papilloma/adenoma/carcinoma (bloody discharge, often single duct), lacta-
tion. Management: Diagnose the cause (mammogram, ultrasound, ductogram); 
then treat appropriately. Cessation of smoking reduces discharge from duct ecta-
sia. Microdochectomy/total duct excision can be considered if other measures fail, 
though may give no improvement in symptoms.

With thanks to Dr Simon Vann Jones for his contribution to this page.

_OHCM_10e.indb   82

_OHCM_10e.indb   82

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
The breast: examination

1      Inspection Assess size and shape of any masses as well as overlying surface. 
Which quadrant (see ﬁ g 2.51)? Note skin involvement; ulceration, dimpling (peau 
d’orange), and nipple inversion/discharge.

2      Palpation of the breast Conﬁ rm size, and shape of any lump. Is it ﬁ xed/teth-
ered to skin or underlying structures (see BOX 2 ‘Palpation’)? Is it ﬂ uctuant/com-
pressible/hard? Temperature? Tender? Mobile (more likely to be ﬁ broadenoma)?
3      Palpation of the axilla for lymph nodes Metastatic spread? Ipsilateral/bilat-

eral? Matted? Fixed?

4      Further examination Examine abdomen for hepatomegaly, spine for tender-

ness, lungs (metastatic spread).

1  General inspection

Always have a chaperone present when examining the breast.
Introduction, consent, position patient sitting at edge of bed with hands by her 
side, expose to waist. Inspect both breasts for obvious masses, contour anomalies, 
asymmetry, scars, ulceration, skin changes, eg peau d’orange (orange peel appear-
ance resulting from oedema). Look for nipple inversion and nipple discharge. Ask 
her to ‘press hands on hips’ and then ‘hands on head’ to accentuate any asymmetri-
cal changes. While patient has her hands raised inspect axillae for any masses as 
well as inspecting under the breasts.

83

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

2  Palpation of the breast

Position patient sitting back at 45° with hand 
behind head (ie right hand behind head when 
examining the right breast—see ﬁ g 2.50). Ask 
patient if she has any pain or discharge. Exam-
ine painful areas last and then ask her to ex-
press any discharge. Examine each breast with 
the ‘normal’ side ﬁ rst. Examine each quadrant 
in turn as well as the axillary tail of Spence (ﬁ g 
2.51) or use a concentric spiral method (ﬁ g 2.52) 
using a ﬂ at hand to roll breast against underly-
ing chest wall. Deﬁ ne any lumps/lumpy areas. 
If you discover a lump, to examine for ﬁ xity to 
the pectoral muscles ask the patient to push 
against your hand with her arm outstretched.

3  Palpation of the axilla

Examine both axillae. When examining right 
axilla, hold the patient’s right arm with your 
right hand and examine axilla with left hand.
Five sets of axillary nodes:
i)  apical (palpate against glenohumeral joint)
ii) anterior (palpate against pectoralis major)
iii) central (palpate against lateral chest wall)
iv) posterior (palpate against latissimus dorsi)
v) medial (palpate against humerus).

Fig  2.50  Correct  patient  position  for 
breast examination.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. Oxford 
Handbook of Clinical Examination and 
Practical Skills (2014), with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

Fig  2.51  The  quadrants  of  the  breast 
with the axillary tail of Spence.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. Oxford 
Handbook of Clinical Examination and 
Practical Skills (2014), with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

4  Further examination

Complete examination by palpating down 
spine for tenderness, examining abdomen for 
hepatomegaly, and lungs for signs of metasta-
ses. Thank patient and wash hands.

Fig 2.52  Methods for systematic breast 
palpation.

Reproduced from Thomas J, et al. Oxford 
Handbook of Clinical Examination and 
Practical Skills (2014), with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   83

_OHCM_10e.indb   83

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
84

The thyroid: examination

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

For symptoms of thyroid disease see p218 & p220. See also lumps in the neck, p598–
600.

1      Inspection The key questions to ask oneself when presented with a lump in the 
neck are: Is this lump thyroid related or not? What is the patient’s thyroid sta-
tus? Inspect the neck; the normal thyroid is usually neither visible nor palpable. A 
midline swelling should raise your suspicion of thyroid pathology. Look for scars 
(eg collar incision from previous thyroid surgery). Examine the face for signs 
of hypothyroidism (puffi  ness, pallor, dry ﬂ aky skin, xanthelasma, corneal arcus, 
balding, loss of lateral third of eyebrow) as well as overall body habitus. Assess 
the patient’s demeanour; do they appear anxious, nervous, agitated, ﬁ dgety (hy-
perthyroid)? Or slow and lethargic (hypothyroid)?

2      Swallow test Only goitres (p600), thyroglossal cysts (p598) and in some cases 

lymph nodes should move up on swallowing.

3      Tongue protrusion test A thyroglossal cyst will move up on tongue protrusion.
4      Palpation (By this stage of the examination if the evidence is in favour of the 
lump not rising from the thyroid it is acceptable to examine the lump like any oth-
er (p594); assess site, size, shape, smoothness (consistency), surface (contour/
edge/colour), and surroundings, as well as transilluminance, ﬁ xation/tether ing, 
ﬂ uctuance/compressibility, temperature, tenderness and whether it is pulsatile.) 
If a thyroid mass is suspected, standing behind the patient provides an oppor-
tunity to check for any proptosis (hyperthyroidism). Proceed to palpate each 
lobe, attempting to decide whether any lump is solitary or multiple, nodular 
or smooth/diffuse as well as site, size, etc. Repeating the swallow test while 
palpating allows you to conﬁ rm the early ﬁ nding, but also attempt to ‘get below 
the lump’. If there is a distinct inferior border under which you can place your 
hand with the entire lump above it then the goitre is unlikely to have retrosternal 
extension. Examining for ‘spread’ to the lymph nodes is particularly important 
if you suspect a thyroid malignancy (p600). Complete palpation by assessing if 
the presence of the lump has caused the trachea to deviate from the midline.
5      Percussion A retrosternal goitre will produce a dull percussion note when the 

sternum is percussed.

6      Auscultation A bruit in a smooth thyroid goitre is suggestive of Graves’ disease 

(p218).

The next stages of the exam are to examine the systemic signs of thyroid status.
7      Hands Clubbing (‘thyroid acropachy’) is seen in Graves’ disease. Palmar erythe-
ma and a ﬁ ne tremor are also signs of thyrotoxicosis. Assess temperature (warm 
peripheries if hyperthyroid) and the radial pulse; tachycardia and atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion are seen in hyperthyroidism, while bradycardia is seen in hypothyroidism.
8      Eyes The ‘normal’ upper eyelid should always cover the upper eye such that the 
white sclera is not visible between the lid and the iris. In hyperthyroidism with 
exophthalmus there is proptosis as well as lid retraction and ‘lid lag’ may also be 
detected. If the patient reports double vision when eye movements are being 
tested this indicates ophthalmoplegia of hyperthyroidism.

9      Asking the patient to stand allows you to assess whether there is any proximal 
myopathy (hypothyroidism). Look for pretibial myxoedema (brown swelling of 
the lower leg above the lateral malleoli in Graves’ disease). Finally, test the reﬂ ex-
es; these will be slow relaxing in hypothyroidism and brisk in hyperthyroidism.
10      Thank the patient and consider whether the lump is a goitre, and if so whether it 
is single/multiple, diff use/nodular, as well as the patient’s thyroid status. Decide 
on a diagnosis (p600).

_OHCM_10e.indb   84

_OHCM_10e.indb   84

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
85

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

1  Inspection
Introduction,  consent,  position  patient  sitting  on  a  chair  (with  space  behind), 
adequately expose neck. Inspect from front and sides for any obvious goitres or 
swellings, scars, signs of hypo-/hyperthyroidism.

2  Swallow test
Standing in front of the patient ask them to ‘sip water…hold in your mouth…and 
swallow’ to see if any midline swelling moves up on swallowing.

3  Tongue protrusion test
Ask patient to ‘stick out your tongue’. Does the lump move up? (Thyroglossal cyst.)

If evidence favours lump not arising 
from thyroid, examine lump like any 
other (p594)

4  Palpation
Stand behind the patient.
  • Proptosis: (p219.) While standing behind the patient ask them to tilt their head 
back slightly; this will give you a better view to assess any proptosis than when 
assessing the other aspects of eye pathology from front on, as in 8)

  • The thyroid gland: Ask the patient ‘any pain?’ Place middle 3 ﬁ ngers of either 
hand along midline below chin and ‘walk down’ to thyroid, 2 ﬁ nger breadths be-
low the cricoid on both sides. Assess any enlargement/ nodules

  • Swallow test: Repeat as before, now palpating; attempt to ‘get under’ the lump
  • Lymph nodes: Examine lymph nodes of head and neck (p60). Stand in front of 

the patient

  • Trachea: Palpate for tracheal deviation from the midline.

5  Percussion
Percuss the sternum for dullness of retrosternal extension of a goitre.

6  Auscultation
Listen over the goitre for a bruit.

7  Hands
  • Inspect: For thyroid acropachy (clubbing) and palmar erythema
  • Temperature
  • Pulse: Rate and rhythm
  • Fine  tremor:  Ask  patient  to  ‘hold  hands  out’,  place  sheet  of  paper  over  out-

stretched hands to help.

8  Eyes
  • Exophthalmos: Inspect for lid retraction and proptosis (p219)
  • Lid lag: Ask patient to ‘look down following ﬁ nger’ as you move your ﬁ nger from 

a point above the eye to below

  • Eye movements: Ask patient to follow your ﬁ nger, keeping their head still, as you 

make an ‘H’ shape. Any double vision?

9  Completion
Ask patient to stand up from the chair to assess for proximal myopathy, look for 
pretibial myxoedema, test ankle reﬂ exes (ask patient to face away from you with 
knee resting on chair). Thank patient and wash hands.

_OHCM_10e.indb   85

_OHCM_10e.indb   85

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
86

Speech and higher mental function

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Have mercy on those with dysphasia: it is one of the most debilitating neurological 
conditions, and the more frustrating when cognitive function is intact.
Dysphasia Impairment of language caused by brain damage.
Assessment:

1      If speech is ﬂ uent, grammatical, and meaningful, dysphasia is unlikely.
2      Comprehension: can the patient follow one-, two-, and several-step commands  

(touch your ear, stand up, then close the door)?

3      Repetition: can the patient repeat a sentence? Eg British Constitution.
4      Naming: can they name common and uncommon things (eg parts of a watch)?
5      Reading and writing: normal? They are usually aff ected like speech in dysphasia. 

If normal, the patient is unlikely to be aphasic—could they be mute?

Classiﬁ cation:
  • Broca’s  (expressive)  anterior  dysphasia—non-ﬂ uent speech produced with ef-
fort and frustration with malformed words, eg ‘spoot’ for ‘spoon’ (or ‘that thing’). 
Reading and writing are impaired but comprehension is relatively intact. Patients 
understand questions and attempt to convey meaningful answers. Site of lesion: in-
fero-lateral dominant frontal lobe (see BOX ‘Problems with classifying dysphasias’).
  • Wernicke’s  (receptive)  posterior  dysphasia—empty,  ﬂ uent  speech,  like  talk-
ing ragtime with phonemic (‘ﬂ ush’ for ‘brush’) and semantic (‘comb’ for ‘brush’) 
paraphasias/neologisms (may be mistaken for psychotic speech). The patient is 
oblivious of errors. Reading, writing, and comprehension are impaired (replies are 
inappropriate). Site of lesion: posterior superior dominant temporal lobe.

  • Conduction aphasia—(traffi  c between Broca’s and Wernicke’s area is interrupt-

ed.) Repetition is impaired; comprehension and ﬂ uency less so.

  • Nominal dysphasia—naming is aff ected in all dysphasias, but in nominal dyspha-
sia, objects cannot be named but other aspects of speech are normal. This occurs 
with posterior dominant temporoparietal lesions.

Mixed dysphasias are common. Discriminating features take time to emerge after 
an acute brain injury. Speech therapy is important, but may not help.
Dysarthria Diffi  culty with articulation due to incoordination or weakness of the 
musculature of speech. Language is normal (see earlier in topic).
  • Assessment: Ask to repeat ‘British Constitution’ or ‘baby hippopotamus’.
  • Cerebellar disease: Ataxia speech muscles cause slurring (as if drunk) and speech 

irregular in volume and staccato in quality.

  • Extrapyramidal disease: Soft, indistinct, and monotonous speech.
  • Pseudobulbar palsy: (p507) Spastic dysarthria (upper motor neuron). Speech is 
slow, indistinct, nasal and eff ortful (‘hot potato’ voice from bilateral hemispheric 
lesions, MND (p506), or severe MS).

  • Bulbar  palsy:  Lower  motor  neuron  (eg  facial  nerve  palsy,  Guillain–Barré,  MND, 

p506)—any associated palatal paralysis gives speech a nasal character.

Dysphonia Diffi  culty with speech volume due to weakness of respiratory muscles 
or vocal cords (myasthenia, p512; Guillain–Barré syndrome, p702). It may be precipi-
tated in myasthenia by asking the patient to count to 100. Parkinson’s gives a mixed 
picture of dysarthria and dysphonia.
Dyspraxia Poor performance of complex movements despite ability to do each in-
dividual component. Test by asking the patient to copy unfamiliar hand positions, or 
mime an object’s use, eg a comb. The term ‘dyspraxia’ is used in three other ways:
  • Dressing dyspraxia: The patient is unsure of the orientation of clothes on his body. 
Test by pulling one sleeve of a sweater inside out before asking the patient to put it 
back on (mostly non-dominant hemisphere lesions).

  • Constructional dyspraxia: Diffi  culty in assembling objects or drawing, eg a ﬁ ve-

pointed star (non-dominant hemisphere lesions, hepatic encephalopathy).

  • Gait dyspraxia: More common in the elderly; seen with bilateral frontal lesions, 

lesions in the posterior temporal region, and hydrocephalus.

_OHCM_10e.indb   86

_OHCM_10e.indb   86

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
Assessing higher mental function: a practical guide
Start by reassuring the patient ‘I know this may be diffi  cult...’ and try to engage 
in conversation; asking questions that need to phrase to answer (ie not just yes/
no). This tests ﬂ uency and reception, understanding, and allows assessment of 
articulation,  eg  ‘How  did  you  travel  here  today?’,  ‘I  came  by  bus’.  Then  assess 
dysphasia by asking: ‘What is this’ eg pen (tests for nominal dysphasia), repeat 
‘British Constitution’ (tests for conduction dysphasia and dysarthria). Then ask 
patient to follow one-, two-, and three-step commands ensuring these ‘cross the 
midline’, eg make a ﬁ st with your right hand then extend your right index ﬁ nger 
and touch your left ear.

Problems with classifying dysphasias
The classical model of language comprehension occurring in Wernicke’s area and 
language expression in Broca’s area is too simple. Functional MRI studies show old 
ideas that processing of abstract words is conﬁ ned to the left hemisphere whereas 
concrete words are processed on the right are too simplistic. 7 It may be better to 
think of a mosaic of language centres in the brain with more or less specialized 
functions. There is evidence that tool-naming is handled diff erently and in a diff erent 
area to fruit-naming. There are also individual diff erences in the anatomy of these 
mosaics. This is depressing for those who want a rigid classiﬁ cation of aphasia, 
but a source of hope to those who have had a stroke: recovery may be better than 
neuroimaging leads us to believe.

87

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Movement disorders

Symptoms of movement disorders
Athetosis is due to a lesion in the putamen, causing slow sinuous writhing move-
ments in the hands, which are present at rest. Pseudoathetosis refers to athetoid 
movements in patients with severe proprioceptive loss.
Chorea means dance (hence ‘choreography’)—a ﬂ ow of jerky movements, ﬂ itting 
from  one  limb  to  another  (each  seemingly  a  fragment  of  a  normal  movement). 
Distinguish  from  athetosis/pseudoathetosis  (above-mentioned),  and  hemiballis-
mus (p468). Causes: Basal ganglia lesion (stroke, Huntington’s, p702); streptococci 
(Sydenham’s chorea; St Vitus’ dance, p142); SLE (p554); Wilson’s (p285); neonatal ker-
nicterus; polycythaemia (p366); neuroacanthocytosis (genetic, with acanthocytes in 
peripheral blood, chorea, oro-facial dyskinesia, and axonal neuropathy); hyperthy-
roidism (p218); drugs (levodopa, oral contraceptives/HRT, chlorpromazine, cocaine—
‘crack dancing’). The early stages of chorea may be detected by feeling ﬂ uctuations 
in muscle tension while the patient grips your ﬁ nger.
: Dopamine antagonists, eg tetrabenazine 12.5mg/12h (/24h if elderly) PO; increase, 
eg to 25mg/8h PO; max 200mg/d.
Hemiballismus is uncontrolled unilateral ﬂ ailing movements of proximal limb joints 
caused by contralateral subthalamic lesions. See p468.
Cerebellar signs
Speech:  Slurred/ataxic/staccato. Eye  movements:  Nystagmus. Tone  and  power: 
Hypotonia and reduced power. Coordination: Finger-to-nose test; test for dysdiado-
chokinesis, p499. Gait: Broad based, patients fall to the side of the lesion. Romberg's 
test: ask patient to stand with eyes closed. If he/she loses balance, the test is posi-
tive and a sign of posterior column disease. Cerebellar disease is Romberg negative.
(DASHING:  Dysdiadochokinesis,  Ataxia,  Slurred  speech,  Hypotonia  and  reduced 
power, Intention tremor, Nystagmus, broad based Gait.)

7  While abstract words activate a sub-region of the left inferior frontal gyrus more strongly than concrete 
words, speciﬁ c activity for concrete words can also be observed in the left basal temporal cortex.

_OHCM_10e.indb   87

_OHCM_10e.indb   87

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
88

Psychiatric assessment

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Introduce yourself, ask a few factual questions (precise name, age, job, and who is at 
home). These may help your patient to relax, but be careful that you do not touch on 
a nerve, eg if job recently lost, marriage recently ended so living alone.
Presenting problem Ask for the main problems that have led to this consultation. 
Sit back and listen. Don’t worry whether the information is in a convenient form 
or not—this is an opportunity for the patient to come out with worries, ideas, and 
preoccupations unsullied by your expectations. After >3–5min it is often good to aim 
to have a list of all the problems (each sketched only brieﬂ y). Read them back to the 
patient and ask if there are any more. Then ask about:
History of presenting problem For each problem obtain details, both current state 
and history of onset, precipitating factors, and eff ects on life.
Check of major psychiatric symptoms Check those that have not yet been cov-
ered:  depression—low  mood,  anhedonia  (inability  to  feel  pleasure),  thoughts  of 
worthlessness/hopelessness, sleep disturbance with early morning waking, loss of 
weight and appetite. Ask speciﬁ cally about suicidal thoughts and plans: ‘Have you 
ever been so low that you thought of harming yourself?’, ‘What thoughts have you 
had?’ Check for hypomanic and manic features which can be missed in a patient 
presenting as depressed. Hallucinations (‘Have you ever heard voices or seen things 
when there hasn’t been anyone or anything there?’) and delusions (‘Have you ever 
had any thoughts or beliefs that have struck you afterwards as bizarre?’); anxiety 
and avoidance behaviour (eg avoiding shopping because of anxiety or phobias); ob-
sessional thoughts and compulsive behaviour, eating disorders, alcohol (see p281 
for alcohol screening tests) and other drugs.
Present circumstances Housing, ﬁ nance, work, relationships, friends.
Family history Ask about health, personality, and occupation of parents and sib-
lings, and the family’s medical and psychiatric history.
Background history Try to understand the context of the presenting problem.
  • Biography: Relationships with family and peers as a child; school and work record; 
sexual relationships and current relationships; and family. Previous ways of dealing 
with stress and whether there have been problems and symptoms similar to the 
presenting ones.

  • Premorbid personality: Mood, character, hobbies, attitudes, and beliefs.
Past medical and psychiatric history Establish any past or present co-morbidities.
Mental state examination This is the state now, at the time of interview.
Appearance: Clothing, glasses, headwear? Unkempt/normal/meticulous?
Observable  behaviour:  Eg  excessive  slowness,  signs  of  anxiety,  gesture,  gaze  or 
avoiding gaze, tears, laughter, pauses (while listening to voices?), attitude (eg with-
drawn).
Mode  of  speech: Include the rate, eg retarded or gabbling (pressure of speech), 
rhythm, and tone of speech.
Mood: Note thoughts about harming self or others. Gauge your own responses to 
the patient. The laughter and grand ideas of manic patients are contagious, as to a 
lesser extent is the expression of thoughts from a depressed person.
Thoughts: Content: eg about himself, his own body, about other people, and the 
future, any suicidal ideation? Note abnormal beliefs (delusions), eg that thoughts are 
overheard, and abnormal ideas (eg persecutory, grandiose). Form: ﬂ ight of ideas? 
Knight’s move thinking? (See BOX ‘Psychiatric symptoms’.)
Unusual experiences or hallucinations: Note modality, eg visual, auditory.
Cognition: Orientated in time, place, and person? Short-term memory: give a name 
and  address  and  test  recall  after  5min.  Draw  the  face  of  a  clock  (requires  good 
frontal and parietal function). Long-term memory: current aff airs recall. Name of 
current political leaders (p64). This tests many other CNS functions, not just memory.
Concentration: Months of the year backwards.
Insight: Does the patient think they are unwell? Do they think you can help? 

_OHCM_10e.indb   88

_OHCM_10e.indb   88

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
89

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

Psychiatric symptoms
There are many diff erent ways to think about psychiatric symptoms. One simple 
approach can be to consider negative and positive symptoms. Negative symp-
toms involve the absence of a behaviour, thought, feeling, or sensation (eg lack 
of appetite, apathy, and blunted emotions in depression), whereas positive symp-
toms involve their presence when not normally expected (eg thought insertion, 
ie  ‘Someone  is  putting  thoughts  into  my  head’).  Understanding  the  diff erence 
between psychosis and neurosis is vital. Psychosis entails a thought disorder (eg 
thought insertion, thought broadcasting) ± delusions (abnormal beliefs which are 
held to despite all reasoning, and which run counter to the patient’s cultural back-
ground) and abnormal perceptions (eg hallucinations). Neurosis entails insight—if 
there are intrusive ideas or odd experiential phenomena, the person knows that 
they are false or illusory (and may be triggered by stress, etc.).

Disorders of thought include ﬂ ight of ideas, in which the speech races through 
themes,  switching  whimsically  or  through  associations,  eg  ‘clang’  association: 
‘Yesterday I went down to the local shop. I didn’t hop (clang), but I walked. Kan-
garoos hop, don’t they? My friend Joey wasn’t there, though…’. Knight’s  move 
is an unexpected change in the direction of speech or conversation (akin to the 
lateral component of the move of the knight’s piece in chess) and neologism is 
the formation of new words. They may be normal or indicate an organic brain 
condition or a psychosis.

Many psychiatric symptoms in isolation, to a lesser degree of severity, or even in 
a diff erent culture, may well be considered part of ‘normal’ behaviour. For exam-
ple, a vision from a religious ﬁ gure may be considered normal, whereas one from 
an alien may not. Consider your patient in their cultural and religious context. 
As with so many aspects of medicine, in psychiatry there is a vast spectrum of 
behaviour, thought, and perception, at least one extreme of which is considered to 
be ‘abnormal’. It is in part our challenge to attempt to interpret these symptoms 
with relevance, insight, and impartiality so that we may best beneﬁ t our patients 
and not form opinions that are set in stone. On acute medical wards psychiatric 
symptoms are often due to stress, drug or alcohol withdrawal, U&E imbalance, or 
medication. When in doubt, ask a psychiatrist to help.

Beware of simplistic formulations, eg If you talk to God, you are praying. If 
God talks to you, you have schizophrenia (Dr Thomas Szasz). It is not the audi-
tory phenomenon that makes the diagnosis of psychosis: what matters is what the 
patient believes about the phenomenon, and whether they are associated with a 
thought disorder or a delusion.

_OHCM_10e.indb   89

_OHCM_10e.indb   89

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
90

Method and order for routine examination

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

1      Look at the patient. Healthy, unwell, or in extremis? This vital skill improves with 
practice. Beware those who are sicker than they look, eg cardiogenic shock; 
cord compression; non-accidental injury.

2      Pulse, BP, RR, O2 sats, T°.
3      Examine nails, hands, conjunctivae (anaemia), and sclerae (jaundice). Consider: 
Paget’s, acromegaly, endocrine disease (thyroid, pituitary, or adrenal hypo- or 
hyper-function), body hair, abnormal pigmentation, skin.

4      Examine mouth and tongue (cyanosed; smooth; furred; beefy, eg rhomboid area 

denuded of papillae by Candida, after prolonged steroid inhaler use).

5      Examine the neck from behind: lymph nodes, goitre.
6      Make sure the patient is at 45° to begin CVS examination in the neck: JVP; feel for 

character and volume of carotid pulse.

7      The praecordium. Look for abnormal pulsations. Feel the apex beat (character; 
position). Any parasternal heave or thrill? Auscultate (bell and diaphragm) apex 
in the left lateral position, then the other three areas (p39) and carotids. Sit the 
patient forward: listen during expiration.

8      While sitting forward, look for sacral oedema.
9      Respiratory examination with the patient at 90°. Observe (and count) RR; note 
posterior chest wall movement. Assess chest expansion, percuss and auscultate.
10      Sit the patient back. Feel the trachea. Inspect again. Assess expansion of the 

anterior chest. Percuss and auscultate again.

11      Examine axillae and breasts, if indicated (chaperone for all intimate examina-

tions).

12      Lie patient ﬂ at (1 pillow) to inspect, palpate, percuss, and auscultate abdomen.
13      Look at the legs: swellings, perfusion, pulses, or oedema? Pitting? What level?
14      CNS exam: Cranial nerves: pupil responses; fundi; visual ﬁ elds; visual acuity. Con-
sider corneal reﬂ exes. ‘Open your mouth; stick your tongue out; screw up your 
eyes; show me your teeth; raise your eyebrows.’ Limbs (most signs are due to 
central not peripheral nerve lesions): look for wasting and fasciculation. Test 
tone in all limbs. ‘Hold your hands out with your palms towards the ceiling and 
ﬁ ngers wide. Now shut your eyes.’ Watch for pronator drift. ‘Keep your eyes shut 
and touch your nose with each index ﬁ nger.’ ‘Lift your leg straight in the air. Keep 
it there. Put your heel on the opposite knee (eyes shut) and run it up your own 
shin.’ You have now tested power, coordination, and joint position sense. Tuning 
fork on toes and index ﬁ ngers to assess vibration sense.

15      Examine gait and speech. Any abnormalities of higher mental function?
16      Consider rectal and vaginal examination (chaperone essential).
17      Examine the urine with dipstick if appropriate.
In general, go into detail where you ﬁ nd (or suspect) something to be wrong.

_OHCM_10e.indb   90

_OHCM_10e.indb   90

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
91

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
x
e
d
n
a
y
r
o
t
s
i
H

_OHCM_10e.indb   91

_OHCM_10e.indb   91

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
3  Cardiovascular medicine

Contents
Cardiovascular health  93

At the bedside (see 40)
Cardiovascular symptoms  94

Investigations:
ECG—a methodical approach  96
ECG—abnormalities  98
ECG—additional points  100
Cardiac imaging  108
Echocardiography 110
Cardiac catheterization 112

Drugs and the heart:
Cardiovascular drugs  114

Diseases and conditions:
Angina pectoris  116
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)  118
Management of ACS  120
Complications of MI  122
Arrhythmias—overview  124
Continuous ECG monitoring  125
Narrow complex tachycardia  126
Broad complex tachycardia  128
Atrial ﬁ brillation (AF) and ﬂ utter  130
Pacemakers  132
Heart failure—basic concepts  134
Heart failure—management  136
Hypertension  138
Hypertension—management  140
Rheumatic fever (RF)  142
Mitral valve disease  144
Aortic valve disease  146
Right heart valve disease  148
Cardiac surgery  148
The heart in various, mostly rare, 

systemic diseases  149

Infective endocarditis (IE)  150
Diseases of heart muscle  152
Pericardial diseases  154
Adult congenital heart disease 

(ACHD)  156

Driving and the heart  158

Fig  3.1  Helen  Taussig  (1898–1986)  battled  dys-
lexia, deafness, and a male-dominated world to 
become a leading cardiologist. She noticed that 
‘blue  babies’  with  a  patent  ductus  arteriosus 
(PDA) tended to survive longer than those with-
out.  This  was  because  many  blue  babies  have 
congenital obstruction to pulmonary blood ﬂ ow 
(eg  pulmonary  stenosis  in  tetralogy  of  Fallot, 
p157) and PDAs increase blood ﬂ ow to the lungs, 
reducing cyanosis. She devised the Blalock–Taus-
sig shunt which creates a passage from the sub-
clavian or carotid artery to one of the pulmonary 
arteries,  mimicing  a  PDA.  This  dramatically  im-
proved survival in babies with tetralogy of Fallot.
One of the joys of cardiology is how often solu-
tions  already  exist  in  nature  and  much  of  our 
intervention  involves  trying  to  mimic  circum-
stances that can occur naturally. Hence, a good 
grasp  of  the  underlying  physiology  is  essential 
for understanding clinical cardiology; as well as 
interesting to pursue in its own right. 

We thank Dr Parag Gajendragadkar, our Specialist Reader, for his contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   92

_OHCM_10e.indb   92

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

93

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Cardiovascul a r health
Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) is the most common cause of death worldwide. 
Encouraging cardiovascular health is not only about preventing IHD: health entails 
the ability to exercise, and enjoying vigorous activity (within reason!) is one of the 
best ways of achieving health, not just because the heart likes it (BP,  ‘good’ high-
density lipoprotein (HDL))—it can prevent osteoporosis, improve glucose tolerance, 
and augment immune function (eg in cancer and if HIV+ve). People who improve 
and maintain their ﬁ tness live longer: age-adjusted mortality from all causes 
is reduced by >40%. Avoiding obesity helps too, but weight loss per se is only 
useful in reducing cardiovascular risk and the risk of developing diabetes when 
combined  with  regular  exercise.  Moderate  alcohol  drinking  may  also  promote 
cardiovascular health.

Hypertension is the chief risk factor for cardiovascular mortality, followed by 
smoking. Giving up smoking, even after many years, does bring beneﬁ t. Simple ad-
vice works. Most smokers want to give up. Just because smoking advice does not 
always work, do not stop giving it. Ask about smoking in consultations—especially 
those regarding smoking-related diseases.
  • Ensure advice is congruent with the patient’s beliefs about smoking.
  • Getting patients to enumerate the advantages of giving up  motivation.
  • Invite the patient to choose a date (when there will be few stresses) on which he 

or she will become a non-smoker.

  • Suggest  throwing  away  all  accessories  (cigarettes,  pipes,  ash  trays,  lighters, 
matches) in advance; inform friends of the new change; practise saying ‘no’ to 
their off ers of ‘just one little cigarette’.

  • Nicotine gum, chewed intermittently to limit nicotine release: ≥ ten 2mg sticks 
may  be  needed/day.  Transdermal  nicotine  patches  may  be  easier.  A  dose  in-
crease at 1wk can help. Written advice off ers no added beneﬁ t to advice from 
nurses. Always off er follow-up.

  • Varenicline is an oral selective nicotine receptor partial agonist. Start 1wk be-
fore target stop date and gradually increase the dose. SES: appetite change; dry 
mouth; taste disturbance; headache; drowsiness; dizziness; sleep disorders; ab-
normal dreams; depression; suicidal thoughts; panic; dysarthria.

  • Bupropion (=amfebutamone) is said to  quit rate to 30% at 1yr vs 16% with 
patches  and  15.6%  for  placebo  (patches  +  bupropion:  35.5%): 1  consider  if  the 
above fails. Warn of SES: seizures (risk <1:1000), insomnia, headache.

Lipids and diabetes (pp690, 206) are the other major modiﬁ able risk factors. The 
QRISK2 score (www.qrisk.org) is used in the UK to integrate a patient’s diff erent car-
diovascular risk factors in order to predict future cardiovascular health.2 It can be 
used as part of a consultation on lifestyle factors to show patients that address-
ing certain risk factors (eg smoking, BP) will reduce their risk of MIs and strokes.
Apply preventive measures such as healthy eating (p244) early in life to maxim-
ize impact, when there are most years to save, and before bad habits get ingrained.

The randomized trial
Cardiovascular medicine has an unrivalled treasure house of randomized trials. 
One  of  the  chief  pleasures  of  cardiovascular  medicine  lies  in  integrating  these 
with clinical reasoning in a humane way. After a cardiac event, a protocol may 
‘mandate’ statins, aspirin, -blockers, ACE-i (p114), and a target BP and LDL choles-
terol that makes your patient feel dreadful. What to do? Inform, negotiate, and 
compromise. Never reject your patient because of lack of compliance with your 
over-exacting regim ens. Keep smiling, keep communicating, and keep up to date: 
the latest data may show that your patient was right all along.3 

_OHCM_10e.indb   93

_OHCM_10e.indb   93

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
94

 Cardiovascular symptoms

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Chest pain Cardiac-sounding chest pain may have no serious cause, but always 
think ‘Could this be a myocardial infarction (MI), dissecting aortic aneurysm, pericar-
ditis, or pulmonary embolism?’.
Character: Constricting suggests angina, oesophageal spasm, or anxiety; a sharp 
pain may be from the pleura, pericardium, or chest wall. A prolonged (>½h), dull, 
central crushing pain or pressure suggests MI.
Radiation: To shoulder, either or both arms, or neck/jaw suggests cardiac ischae-
mia. The pain of aortic dissection (p654) is classically instantaneous, tearing, and 
interscapular, but may be retrosternal. Epigastric pain may be cardiac.
Precipitants: Pain associated with cold, exercise, palpitations, or emotion suggests 
cardiac pain or anxiety; if brought on by food, lying ﬂ at, hot drinks, or alcohol, con-
sider oesophageal spasm/disease (but meals can also cause angina).
Relieving factors: If pain is relieved within minutes by rest or glyceryl trinitrate 
(GTN), suspect angina (GTN relieves oesophageal spasm more slowly). If antacids help, 
suspect GI causes. Pericarditic pain improves on leaning forward.
Associations: Dyspnoea occurs with cardiac pain, pulmonary emboli, pleurisy, or 
anxiety. MI may cause nausea, vomiting, or sweating. Angina is caused by coronary 
artery  disease—and  also  by  aortic  stenosis,  hypertrophic  cardiomy opathy  (HCM), 
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT)—and can be exacerbated by anae-
mia. Chest pain with tenderness suggests self-limiting Tietze’s syndrome. 1 Odd neu-
rological symptoms and atypical chest pain—think aortic dissection.
Pleuritic pain: Pain exacerbated by inspiration. Implies inﬂ ammation of the pleura 
from  pulmonary  infection,  inﬂ ammation,  or  infarction.  It  causes  us  to  ‘catch  our 
breath’. : musculoskeletal pain;1 fractured rib (pain on respiration, exacerbated 
by gentle pressure on the sternum); subdiaphragmatic pathology (eg gallstones).
Chest pain & acutely unwell (see p784) • Admit • Check pulse, BP in both arms 
(unequal in aortic dissection p654), JVP, heart sounds; examine legs for DVT • Give O2 
• IV line • Relieve pain (eg 5–10mg IV morphine) • Cardiac monitor • 12-lead ECG • CXR 
• Arterial blood gas (ABG) Famous traps: Aortic dissection; zoster (p404); ruptured 
oesophagus; cardiac tamponade (p154); opiate addiction.
Dyspnoea May be from LVF, PE, any respiratory cause, anaemia, pain, or anxiety.
Severity: Emergency presentations: p782. Ask about shortness of breath at rest, 
on exertion, and on lying ﬂ at; has their exercise tolerance changed? Associations: 
Speciﬁ c symptoms associated with heart failure are orthopnoea (ask about number 
of pillows used at night), paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (waking up at night gasp-
ing for breath, p49), and peripheral oedema. Pulmonary embolism is associated with 
acute onset of dyspnoea and pleuritic chest pain; ask about risk factors for DVT.
Palpitation(s) May be due to ectopics, sinus tachycardia, AF, SVT, VT, thyrotoxicosis, 
anxiety,  and  rarely  phaeochromocytoma.  See  p36.  History:  Characterize:  do  they 
mean their heart was beating fast, hard, or irregularly? Ask about previous episodes, 
precipitating/relieving factors, duration of symptoms, associated chest pain, dysp-
noea, dizziness, or collapse. Did the patient check their pulse?
Syncope May reﬂ ect cardiac or CNS events. Vasovagal ‘faints’ are common (pulse, 
pupils dilated). The history from an observer is invaluable in diagnosis. Prodromal 
symptoms: Chest pain, palpitations, or dyspnoea point to a cardiac cause, eg ar-
rhythmia.  Aura,  headache,  dysarthria,  and  limb  weakness  indicate  CNS  causes. 
During the episode: Was there a pulse? Limb jerking, tongue biting, or urinary incon-
tinence? NB: hypoxia from lack of cerebral perfusion may cause seizures. Recovery: 
Was this rapid (arrhythmia) or prolonged, with drowsiness (seizure)?

1  25% of non-cardiac chest pain is musculoskeletal: look for pain on speciﬁ c postures or activity. Aim to 
reproduce the pain by movement and, sometimes, palpation over the structure causing it.  Focal inj ection of 
local anaesthetic helps diagnostically and is therapeutic.  Tietze’s syndrome: self-limiting costochond ritis 
± costosternal joint swelling. Causes: idiopathic; microtrauma; infection; psor iatic/rheumatoid arthritis. : 
NSAIDS or steroid injections.  Tenderness is also caused by: ﬁ brositis, lymph oma, chondrosarcoma, myeloma, 
metastases, rib TB.  Imaging: bone scintigraphy;  CT. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   94

_OHCM_10e.indb   94

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
95

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Chest pain from the patient’s perspective
On acute wards we are always hearing questions such as ‘Is your pain sharp or 
dull?’, followed by an equivocal answer. The doctor goes on: ‘Sharp like a knife—or 
dull and crushing?’ The doctor is getting irritated because the patient must know 
the answer but is not saying it. A true story paves the way to being less inquisito-
rial and having a more creative understanding of the nature of symptoms.
A patient came to a previous OHCM author saying ‘Last night I dreamed I had a 
pain in my chest. Now I’ve woken up, and I’m not sure—have I got chest pain, 
doctor? What do you think?’ How odd it is to be asked to examine a patient to 
exclude a symptom, not a disease. (It turned out that she did have serious chest 
pathology.) Odd, until one realizes that symptoms are often half-formed, and it 
is our role to give them a local habitation and a name. Dialogue can transform a 
symptom from ‘airy nothingness’ to a fact. 2
Patients often avoid using the word ‘pain’ to describe ischaemia: ‘wind’, ‘tighten-
ing’, ‘pressure’, ‘burning’, or ‘a lump in the throat’ (angina means to choke) may 
be used. They may say ‘sharp’ to communicate severity, and not character. So be 
as vague in your questioning as your patient is in their answers. ‘Tell me some 
more about what you are feeling (long pause) … as if someone was doing what to 
you?’ ‘Sitting on me’ or ‘like a hotness’ might be the response (suggesting cardiac 
ischaemia). Do not ask ‘Does it go into your left arm’. Try ‘Is there anything else 
about it?’ (pause) … ‘Does it go anywhere?’ Note down your patient’s exact words.
A good history, taking account of these features, is the best way to stratify pa-
tients likely to have cardiac pain. If the history is non-speciﬁ c, there are no risk fac-
tors for cardiovascular diseases, and ECG and plasma troponin T (p118) are normal 
6–12h after the onset of pain, discharge will probably be OK. 4 When in doubt, get 
help. Features making cardiac pain unlikely:
  • Stabbing, shooting pain.
  • Pain lasting <30s, however intense.
  • Well-localized, left sub-mammary pain (‘In my heart, doctor’).
  • Pains of continually varying location.
  • Youth.
Do not feel that you must diagnose every pain. Chest pain with no cause is com-
mon, even after extensive tests. Some patients have a ‘chronic pain syndrome’ 
similar to post-herpetic neuralgia. Typically, this responds to a tricyclic, eg low-
dose amitriptyline at night (this dose does not imply any depression).
Avoid being that doctor who triumphantly tells a patient that they are ﬁ ne and 
can go home, only to be met by a glare, as the disabling pain the patient presented 
with is no better than when they arrived. Take time to explain why you do not 
believe the pain is a result of dangerous pathology; to give advice on pain control 
and ‘red ﬂ ags’; and to reassure the patient that their problem is likely to resolve 
with time.

2  Dialogue-transformed symptoms explain one of the junior doctor’s main vexations: when patients retell 
symptoms to a consultant in the light of day, they bear no resemblance to what you originally heard. But do 
not be vexed: your dialogue may have helped the patient far more than any ward round.

_OHCM_10e.indb   95

_OHCM_10e.indb   95

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
96

ECG—a methodical approach

Reading an ECG
First conﬁ rm the patient’s name and age, and the ECG date. Then (see ﬁ g 3.3):
  • Rate: At usual speed (25mm/s) each ‘big square’ is 0.2s; each ‘small square’ is 0.04s. 
To calculate the rate, divide 300 by the number of big squares between two con-
secutive R waves (table 3.1). The normal rate is 60–100bpm.

  • Rhythm: If cycles are not clearly regular, use the ‘card method’: lay a card along 
the ECG, marking positions of three successive R waves. Slide the card to and fro to 
check that all intervals are equal. If they are not, note if:

  • there is slight but regular lengthening and then shortening (with respiration)—

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

sinus arrhythmia, common in the young

  • there are diff erent rates which are multiples of each other—varying block
  • it is 100% irregular—atrial ﬁ brillation (AF) or ventricular ﬁ bril lation (VF).

Sinus rhythm is characterized by a P wave followed by a QRS complex. AF has no dis-
cernible P waves and QRS complexes are irregularly irregular. Atrial ﬂ utter (p130, ﬁ g 
3.35 p131) has a ‘sawtooth’ baseline of atrial depolarization (~300/min) and regular 
QRS complexes. Ventricular rhythm has QRS complexes >0.12s with P waves follow-
ing them or absent (ﬁ g 3.12, p106).

  • Axis: The overall direction of depolarization across the patient’s anterior chest; this 
is the sum of all the ventricular electrical forces during ventricular depolarization. 
See BOX ‘Determining the ECG axis’. Left axis deviation can result from left anterior 
hemiblock, inferior MI, VT from a left ventricular focus, WPW, LVH. Right axis devia-
tion can result from RVH, PE, anterolateral MI, WPW and left posterior hemiblock.
  • P wave: Normally precedes each QRS complex, and upright in II, III, & aVF but invert-
ed in aVR. Absent P wave: AF, P hidden due to junctional or ventricular rhythm. P mi-
trale: biﬁ d P wave, indicates left atrial hypertrophy. P pulmonale: peaked P wave, 
indicates right atrial hyper trophy. Pseudo-P-pulmonale seen if K+.

  • PR interval: Measure from start of P wave to start of QRS. Normal range: 0.12–0.2s 
(3–5  small  squares).  A  prolonged  PR  interval  implies  delayed  AV  conduction  (1st 
degree heart block). A short PR interval implies unusually fast AV conduction down 
an accessory pathway, eg WPW (see ﬁ g 3.37, p133). See heart block, p98.

R

R

R

R'

R

R

S

S

Q S

Q

Q S

Fig 3.2  ‘QRS’ complexes. If the ﬁ rst deﬂ ection from the isoelectric line is negative, it is a Q wave. 
Any positive deﬂ ection is an R wave. Any negative deﬂ ection after an R is an S. 

  • QRS complex: See ﬁ g 3.2. Normal duration: <0.12s. QRS >0.12s suggests ventricular 
conduction defects, eg a bundle branch block (pp99, 100), metabolic disturbance, or 
ventricular origin (eg ventricular ectopic). High-amplitude QRS complexes suggest 
ventricular hypertrophy (p100). Normal Q waves are <0.04s wide and <2mm deep; 
they are often seen in leads I , aVL , V5, and V6 and reﬂ ect normal septal depolariza-
tion. Pathological Q waves (deep and wide) may occur within a few hours of an 
acute MI.

  • QT interval: Measure from start of QRS to end of T wave. It varies with rate. The 
corrected QT interval (QTc) is the QT interval divided by the square root of the R–R 
interval, ie QTc=QT/√RR. Normal QTc: 0.38–0.42s. For causes of prolonged QT interval 
see p711. Long QT can lead to VT and sudden death.

  • ST segment: Usually isoelectric. Planar elevation (>1mm) or depression (>0.5mm) usu-

ally implies infarction (p119, ﬁ gs 3.9, 3.10, pp103–4) or ischaemia, respectively.

  • T wave: Normally inverted in aVR, V1, and occasionally V2. Normal if inverted in isola-
tion in lead III. Abnormal if inverted in I, II, and V4–V6. Peaked in hyperkalaemia (ﬁ g 
14.4, p675) and ﬂ attened in hypokalaemia.

  • J wave: See p849. The J point is where the S wave ﬁ nishes and ST segment starts. A 

J wave is a notch at this point. Seen in hypothermia, SAH, and Ca2+.

_OHCM_10e.indb   96

_OHCM_10e.indb   96

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
97

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.3  Schematic diagram of a normal ECG trace.

Calculating the heart rate
Divide 300 by the number of big squares per R–R interval (assumes the UK standard 
ECG speed of 25mm/s, elsewhere 50mm/s may be used: don’t be confused!).
Table 3.1  Calculating heart rate from the R–R interval.

R–R duration (s)
0.2
0.6
1.0
1.4

Big squares
1
3
5
7

Rate (per min)
300
100
60
43

Determining the ECG axis
Each ‘lead’ on the 12-lead ECG represents electrical activity along a particular plane 
(see ﬁ g 3.4).
The axis lies at 90° to the di-
rection of the lead in which 
the  isoelectric  (equally  +ve 
and  Ωve)  QRS  complex  is 
found.  For  example,  if  the 
QRS  is  isoelectric  in  lead  II 
(+60°), the axis is either:
+60° Ω 90° = Ω30°, or
+60° + 90° = +150°.

Fig 3.4  The planes represented by the limb ‘leads’.

If  the  QRS  is  more  positive 
than  negative  in  lead  I  (0°) 
then the axis must be Ω30°, 
and vice versa.
In practice, the exact axis matters little; what you need to be able to recognize is 
whether the axis is normal (Ω30° to +90°), left-deviated (<Ω30°), or right deviated 
(>+90°). There are many ways of doing this. If the QRS in lead I (0°) is predomi-
nantly positive (the R wave is taller than the S wave is deep), the axis must be be-
tween Ω90° and +90°. If lead II (+60°) is mostly positive, the axis must be between 
Ω30° and +150°. So if both I and II are positive, the axis must be between Ω30° and 
+90°—the normal range. When II is negative, the axis is likely to be left-deviated 
(<Ω30°) and when I is negative, the axis is likely to be right-deviated (>+90°). One 
way of remembering this is:

Lovers Leaving—Left axis deviation—the QRS complexes in I and II point away 
from each other.
Lovers  Returning—Right  axis  deviation—the  QRS  complexes  in  I  and  III  ± II 
point towards each other (ﬁ g 3.11).

_OHCM_10e.indb   97

_OHCM_10e.indb   97

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
98

ECG—abnormalities

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Sinus tachycardia All impulses are initiated in the sinoatrial node (‘sinus rhythm’) 
hence all QRSS are preceeded by a normal P wave with a normal PR interval. Tachycar-
dia means rate >100bpm. See p127.
Sinus bradycardia Sinus rhythm at a rate <60bpm. Causes: Physical ﬁ tness, vas-
ovagal attacks, sick sinus syndrome, drugs (-blockers, digoxin, amiodarone), hypo-
thyroidism, hypothermia, intracranial pressure, cholestasis. See p122.
AF (ECG p125) Common causes: IHD, thyrotoxicosis, hypertension, obesity, heart fail-
ure, alcohol. See p130.
Heart block (HB) (See ﬁ g 3.5.) Disrupted passage of electrical impulse through the 
AV node.
1st-degree HB: The PR interval is prolonged and unchanging; no missed beats.
2nd-degree HB: Mobitz I: The PR interval becomes longer and longer until a QRS is 
missed, the pattern then resets. This is Wenckebach phenomenon.
2nd-degree HB: Mobitz II: QRSs are regularly missed. eg P - QRS - P - - P - QRS - P - - this 
would be Mobitz II with 2:1 block (2P:1QRS). This is a dangerous rhythm as it may 
progress to complete heart block.
1st- and 2nd-degree HB may be caused by: normal variant, athletes, sick sinus syn-
drome, IHD (esp inferior MI), acute myocarditis, drugs (digoxin, -blockers).
3rd-degree HB: Complete heart block: No impulses are passed from atria to ventri-
cles so P waves and QRSS appear independently of each other. As tissue distal to the 
AVN paces slowly, the patient becomes very bradycardic, and may develop haemo-
dynamic compromise. Urgent treatment is required. Causes: IHD (esp inferior MI), 
idiopathic (ﬁ brosis), congenital, aortic valve calciﬁ c ation, cardiac surgery/trauma, 
digoxin toxicity, inﬁ ltration (abscesses, granulomas, tumours, parasites).
ST elevation Normal variant (high take-off ), acute MI (STEMI), Prinzmetal’s angina 
(p708), acute pericarditis (saddle-shaped), left ventricular aneurysm.
ST depression Normal variant (upward sloping), digoxin toxicity (downward sloping), 
ischaemic (horizontal): angina, NSTEMI, acute posterior MI (ST depression in V1–V3).
T inversion In V1–V3: normal (black patients and children), right bundle branch block 
(RBBB), RV strain (eg secondary to PE). In V2–V5: anterior ischaemia, HCM, subarachnoid 
haemorrhage, lithium. In V4–V6  and aVL: lateral ischaemia, LVH, left bundle branch 
block (LBBB). In II, III and aVF: inferior ischaemia.
NB: ST- and T-wave changes are often non-speciﬁ c, and must be interpreted in the 
light of the clinical context.
Myocardial infarction (See p118 and ﬁ g 3.21; example ECGs ﬁ gs 3.9, 3.10)
  • Within hours, the T wave may become peaked and ST segments may begin to rise.
  • Within 24h, the T wave inverts. ST elevation rarely persists, unless a left ventricular 

aneurysm develops. T-wave inversion may or may not persist.

  • Within a few days, pathological Q waves begin to form. Q waves usually persist, but 

may resolve in 10% of patients.

  • The location of these changes indicates the ischaemic area location, see table 3.2.
Pulmonary embolism (ﬁ g 3.11) ECG ﬁ ndings may include: sinus tachycardia (com-
monest), RBBB (p100), right ventricular strain pattern (R-axis deviation, dominant R 
wave and T-wave inversion/ST depression in V1 and V2,). Rarely, the ‘SIQIIITIII’ pattern 
occurs: deep S waves in I, pathological Q waves in III, inverted T waves in III.
Metabolic abnormalities Digoxin effect: Down-sloping ST depression and inverted 
T wave in V5–V6 (‘reversed tick’, see ﬁ g 3.19). In digoxin toxicity, any arrhythmia may 
occur (ventricular ectopics and nodal bradycardia are common). Hyperkalaemia: 
Tall, tented T wave, widened QRS, absent P waves, ‘sine wave’ appearance (see ﬁ g 14.4, 
p675). Hypokal aemia: Small T waves, prominent U waves, peaked P waves. Hypercal-
caemia: Short QT interval. Hypocalcaemia: Long QT interval, small T waves. See p711 
for causes of long QT intervals.

_OHCM_10e.indb   98

_OHCM_10e.indb   98

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
99

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

P

P

P

P

First degree AV block. P–R interval = 0.28s.

P

P

P

P

Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) AV block. With each successive QRS,
the P–R interval increases until there is a non-conducted P wave.

P

P

P

P

P

Mobitz type II AV block. Ratio of AV conduction varies from 2:1 to 3:1.

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Complete AV block with narrow ventricular complex.
There is no relation between atrial and the slower ventricular activity.

Fig 3.5  Rhythm strips of heart blocks.

Location, location, location
When considering rate and rhythm, your ﬁ ndings should be the same in all leads, 
albeit clearer in some than others. Other ECG features may vary lead by lead, both 
in terms of what is ‘normal’ and in what a change indicates. For example, ST eleva-
tion in leads II, III, and aVF suggests an inferior MI requiring immediate treatment, 
likely PCI to the right coronary artery, see table 3.2. ST elevation across all leads, 
however, suggests instead pericarditis which necessitates entirely diff erent man-
agement (p154). An R wave taller than the S is deep (R dominance) is normal in V5 
and V6 but may suggest right ventricular strain or posterior MI if seen in V1 and V2.
Table 3.2  ECG territories
ECG leads
I, aVL, V4–V6
V1–3
II, III, aVF

Heart territory
Lateral
Anterioseptal
Inferior

Coronary artery
Circumﬂ ex
Left anterior descending
Right coronary artery in 80%
Circumﬂ ex in 20%: ‘left dominant’
Circumﬂ ex

V7–9

Posterior

Following a posterior MI, the standard 12-lead ECG will not show Q waves, ST 
elevation or hyperacute T waves. Instead, you may ﬁ nd these changes but 
‘upside-down’ in V1–V3: prominent R waves, ﬂ at ST depression, and T-wave inver-
sion. If you record V7–V9 leads, you may ﬁ nd the classic ST elevation pattern and 
so conﬁ rm posterior MI. See ﬁ g 3.24.

The ‘upside-down’ changes seen in posterior MI are called ‘reciprocal changes’: 
changes that appear when ‘looking’ at ischaemic myocardium from the other side 
of the heart. These can arise with MIs in other locations (ﬁ g 3.9). They are particu-
larly important in posterior MI as they may be the only changes on the 12-lead ECG.
See ﬁ g 3.9, 3.10, 3.24 for example ECGs. See ﬁ g 3.18 for coronary artery anatomy. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   99

_OHCM_10e.indb   99

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
100

ECG—a dditional points

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Where to place the chest leads (See ﬁ g 3.6.)
V1 :  Right sternal edge, 4th intercostal space.
V2 :  Left sternal edge, 4th intercostal space.
V3 :  Half-way between V2 and V4.
V4 :  5th intercostal space, mid-clavicular line; all 
subsequent leads are in the same horizontal 
plane as V4.

V5 :  Anterior axillary line.
V6 :  Mid-axillary line (V7: posterior axillary line).
Good skin preparation (clean with non-alcoholic 
wipe, shave if hairy, etc.) will improve  ECG qual-
ity. Finish 12-lead  ECGs with a long rhythm strip 
in lead II. 
QRS complexes: the long and the short
QRS complexes represent ventricular depolariza-
tion, and width represents time, so a broader QRS 
complex means depolarization of the ventricles is 
taking longer. Normally, a wave of depolarization reaches the ventricles via the spe-
cialist conduction pathways—the bundles of His. This delivers the electrical activity 
to certain points of the ventricles, meaning the waves of depolarization need travel 
as short a distance as possible to depolarize all the ventricular myocardium. This al-
lows rapid spread of depolarization and thus an effi  cient contraction action as both 
ventricles contract from apex to outﬂ ow tracts together. Hence, the QRS complex is 
narrow (<120ms).

Fig 3.6  Placement of ECG leads.

Ventricular depolarization takes longer when depolarization is not initiated in this 
pattern. For example, if it originates in the ventricles (eg ventricular ectopics, VT) 
or if one or more branches of the bundles of His are blocked—bundle branch blocks 
—meaning depolarization is initiated in one ventricle but not the other, so it has to 
travel the long (in time and space) path from one ventricle to the other.

Ventricular depolarization also takes longer if all conduction is slowed. This may 

happen in some electrolyte imbalances, eg hyperkalaemia.
Right bundle branch block: (p102, ﬁ g 3.8) QRS >0.12s, ‘RSR’ pattern in V1; dominant R in 
V1; inverted T waves in V1–V3 or V4; wide, slurred S wave in V6. Causes: normal variant 
(isolated RBBB), pulmonary embolism, cor pulmonale.
Left bundle branch block: (p101, ﬁ g 3.7) QRS >0.12s, ‘M’ pattern in V5, dominant S in 
V1, inverted T waves in I, aVL, V5–V6. Causes: IHD, hypertension, cardiomyopathy, idi-
opathic ﬁ brosis. NB: if there is LBBB, no comment can be made on the ST segment or 
T wave. New LBBB may represent a STEMI, see p798.
Bifascicular block: The combination of RBBB and left bundle hemiblock, manifest as 
an axis deviation, eg left axis deviation in the case of left anterior hemiblock.
Trifascicular block: Bifascicular block plus 1st-degree HB. May need pacing (p132).
Suspect left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) if the R wave in V6 is >25mm or the sum 
of the S wave in V1 and the R wave in V6 is >35mm (see ﬁ g 3.41).
Suspect right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) if dominant R wave in V1, T wave inver-
sion in V1–V3 or V4, deep S wave in V6, right axis deviation.
Other causes of dominant R wave in V1: RBBB, posterior MI, type A WPW syndrome 
(p133).
Causes  of  low-voltage  QRS complex:  (QRS  <5mm  in  all  limb  leads.)  Hypothyroid-
ism, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), haematocrit (intracardiac blood 
resistivity is related to haematocrit), changes in chest wall impedance (eg in renal 
failure & subcutaneous emphysema but not obesity), pulmonary embolism, bundle 
branch  block,  carcinoid  heart  disease,  myocarditis,  cardiac  amyloid,  doxorubicin 
cardiotoxicity, and other heart muscle diseases, pericardial eff usion, pericarditis. 5
See lifeinthefastlane.com for excellent ECG tutorials, cases, and examples.

_OHCM_10e.indb   100

_OHCM_10e.indb   100

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.7  Left bundle branch block: wide QRS with a W pattern in V1 (slight notching in upstroke of S wave—clearer in V3) and the M pattern in V6. WiLLiaM = LBBB.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

2

2

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
2

Fig 3.8  Right bundle branch block—broad QRS, M pattern in V1 and sloped S wave (with the eye of faith, a ‘W’ shape) in V5. MaRRoW = RBBB.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

3

3

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.9  Acute infero-lateral myocardial infarction: marked ST elevation in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF), but also in V5 and V6, indicating lateral involvement. 
There is a ‘reciprocal change’ of ST-segment depression in leads I and aVL; this is often seen with a large inferior myocardial infarction.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

4

4

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
4

Fig 3.10  Acute anterior myocardial infarction—ST segment elevation and evolving Q waves (the ﬁ rst QRS deﬂ ection is negative) in leads V1–4.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

5

5

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.11  Changes seen in pulmonary hypertension (eg after a PE).
  • Right axis deviation (QRS more negative than positive in lead I);
  • Positive QRS complexes (‘dominant R waves’) in V1 and V2 suggesting right ventricular hypertrophy;
  • ST depression and T-wave inversion in the right precordial leads (V1–3) suggesting right ventricular strain;
  • Peaked P waves (P pulmonale) suggesting right atrial hypertrophy.

Reproduced from Handler et al., Pulmonary Hypertension, 2012, with permission from Oxford University Press.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

6

6

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
6

Fig 3.12  Ventricular tachycardia—regular broad complex tachycardiac indicating a likely ventricular origin for the rhythm.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

0

0

7

7

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.13  Dual chamber pacemaker. Pacing spikes occur before each P wave and each QRS complex. Paced QRS complexes are broad as the impulse starts in the ventricles.
Reproduced from Myerson et al., Emergencies in Cardiology, 2012, with permission from Oxford University Press.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
0
7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108

Cardiac imaging

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

There are many heart conditions associated with structural defects, eg valve defects, 
congenital heart diseases, and some muscle disorders (eg hypertrophic cardiomyo-
pathy (HCM)). Whilst clues to these can sometimes be found on history, examination, 
and ECG, it is imaging that gives the diagnosis. Imaging is also helpful for conditions 
that are not primarily due to deformities but which aff ect the way the heart func-
tions. For example, after an  MI the aff ected territory may be hypokinetic. Stress 
techniques allow us to observe the heart at rest and then under stress, comparing 
the perfusion and function in the two states. Cardiac MRI is a rapidly expanding area 
although not yet available in all major hospitals.
Chest X-ray The humble chest X-ray provides just a snapshot of the heart and little 
detail but can be an important source of information and is often the only immedi-
ately accessible imaging modality for a new or newly unwell patient. An enlarged 
heart (cardiothoracic ratio >0.5) suggests congestive heart failure; signs of pulmo-
nary oedema suggest decompensated heart failure (see ﬁ g 3.38); a globular heart 
may  indicate  pericardial  eff usion  (ﬁ g  3.14);  metal  wires  and  valves  will  show  up, 
evidencing previous cardiothoracic surgery; dextrocardia may explain a bizarre ECG; 
and rib notching may be an important clue in coarctation of the aorta (p156).
Echocardiography This is the workhorse of cardiological imaging. Ultrasound is 
used to give real-time images of the moving heart. This can be transthoracic (TTE) 
or transoesophageal (TOE), at rest, during exercise, or after infusion of a pharmaco-
logical stressor (eg dobutamine). If the patient is too unwell to be moved, an echo 
machine can be brought to them and continuous TOE imaging may be used as a guide 
during surgery. Increasingly pocket-sized echo machines are used for a quick assess-
ment of an unwell patient, to be followed by a formal scan later. See p110.
Cardiac CT This can provide detailed information about cardiac structure and func-
tion. CT angiography (ﬁ g 3.15) permits contrast-enhanced imaging of coronary ar-
teries during a single breath hold with very low radiation doses. It can diagnose 
signiﬁ cant  (>50%)  stenosis  in  coronary  artery  disease  with  an  accuracy  of  89%. 
CT coronary angiography has a negative predictive value of >99%, which makes it 
an eff ective non-invasive alternative to routine transcatheter coronary angiography 
to rule out coronary artery disease.6 Medications are often given to slow the heart 
down and the imaging may be ‘gated’, meaning the scanner is programmed to take 
images at times corresponding to certain points on the patient’s ECG. This allows 
characterization of the heart at diff erent points in the cardiac cycle. See p740.
Cardiac MR A radiation-free method of characterizing cardiac structure and func-
tion including viability of myocardium. By varying the settings, diff erent defects can 
be found. MR is the ﬁ rst-choice imaging method to look at diseases that directly af-
fect the myocardium (ﬁ g 3.16). Nowadays, pacemakers are available which are safe 
for MR scanning—check MR safety with your cardiac technicians before requesting 
MR for patients with pacemakers in situ. See p740.
Nuclear imaging Perfusion is assessed at rest and with exercise- or pharmacolog-
ically-induced stress. This test is particularly useful for assessing whether myocar-
dium distal to a blockage is viable and so whether stenting or CABG will be of value. 
If hypoperfusion is ‘ﬁ xed’, ie present at rest and under stress, the hypoperfused area 
is probably scar tissue and so non-viable. If hypoperfusion is ‘reversible’ at rest, the 
myocardium may beneﬁ t from improved blood supply. See p741.

_OHCM_10e.indb   108

_OHCM_10e.indb   108

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
109

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.14  Two chest X-rays of the same patient, the one on the right was taken 6 months after the 
one on the left. On the later image, a pericardial eff usion has expanded the cardiac shadow and 
given it a ‘globular’ shape.

Reproduced from Leeson, Cardiovascular Imaging, 2011, with permission from Oxford University Press.

Fig  3.15  Cardiac  CT  demonstrating  coronary  artery 
stenosis.

Reproduced from Camm et al., ESC Textbook of Cardio-
vascular Medicine, 2009, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig  3.16  Cardiac  MR  image  demonstrat-
ing the asymmetrical left ventricular wall 
thickening typical of hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy.

Reproduced from Myerson et al., Cardio-
vascular Magnetic Resonance, 2013, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   109

_OHCM_10e.indb   109

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
110

Echocardiography

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

This non-invasive technique uses the diff ering ability of various structures within 
the heart to reﬂ ect ultrasound waves. It not only demonstrates anatomy but also 
provides a continuous display of the functioning heart throughout its cycle.
Types of scan
M-mode (motion mode): A single-dimension image.
Two-dimensional (real time): A 2D, fan-shaped image of a segment of the heart is 
produced on the screen (ﬁ g 3.17); the moving image may be ‘frozen’. Several views 
are possible, including long axis, short axis, 4-chamber, and subcostal. 2D echocar-
diography is good for visualizing conditions such as: congenital heart disease,  LV 
aneurysm, mural thrombus, LA myxoma, septal defects.
3D echocardiography: Now possible with matrix array probes, and is termed 4D (3D + 
time) if the images are moving.
Doppler and colour-ﬂ ow echocardiography: Diff erent coloured jets illustrate ﬂ ow 
and gradients across valves and septal defects (p156) (Doppler eff ect, p736).
Tissue Doppler imaging: This employs Doppler ultrasound to measure the velocity 
of myocardial segments over the cardiac cycle. It is particularly useful for assessing 
longitudinal motion—and hence long-axis ventricular function, which is a sensitive 
marker of systolic and diastolic heart failure.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE): More sensitive than transthoracic echo-
cardiography (TTE) as the transducer is nearer to the heart. Indications: diagnosing 
aortic dissections; assessing prosthetic valves; ﬁ nding cardiac source of emboli, and 
IE/SBE. Contraindicated in oesophageal disease and cervical spine instability.
Stress echocardiography: Used to evaluate ventricular function, ejection fraction, 
myocardial thickening, regional wall motion pre- and post-exercise, and to charac-
terize valvular lesions. Dobutamine or dipyridamole may be used if the patient can-
not exercise. Inexpensive and as sensitive/speciﬁ c as a thallium scan (p741).
Uses of echocardiography
Quantiﬁ cation of global LV function: Heart failure may be due to systolic or diastol-
ic ventricular impairment (or both). Echo helps by measuring end-diastolic volume. If 
this is large, systolic dysfunction is the likely cause. If small, diastolic. Pure forms of 
diastolic dysfunction are rare. Diff erentiation is important because vasodilators are 
less useful in diastolic dysfunction as a high ventricular ﬁ lling pressure is required.

Echo is also useful for detecting focal and global hypokinesia, LV aneurysm, mural 

thrombus, and LVH (echo is 5–10 times more sensitive than ECG in detecting this).
Estimating right heart haemodynamics: Doppler studies of pulmonary artery ﬂ ow 
and tricuspid regurgitation allow evaluation of RV function and pressures.
Valve disease: The technique of choice for measuring pressure gradients and valve 
oriﬁ ce areas in stenotic lesions. Detecting valvular regurgitation and estimating its 
signiﬁ cance is less accurate. Evaluating function of prosthetic valves is another role.
Congenital heart disease: Establishing the presence of lesions, and signiﬁ cance.
Endocarditis: Vegetations may not be seen if <2mm in size. TTE with colour Doppler 
is best for aortic regurgitation (AR). TOE is useful for visualizing mitral valve vegeta-
tions, leaﬂ et perforation, or looking for an aortic root abscess.
Pericardial effusion: Best diagnosed by echo. Fluid may ﬁ rst accumulate between 
the posterior pericardium and the left ventricle, then anterior to both ventricles and 
anterior and lateral to the right atrium. There may be paradoxical septal motion.
HCM: (p152) Echo features include asymmetrical septal hypertrophy, small LV cavity, 
dilated left atrium, and systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve.

_OHCM_10e.indb   110

_OHCM_10e.indb   110

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
111

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

(a)

(b)

Septum

RV

Inferolateral
wall

LV

MV
Anterior leaﬂet
    Posterior leaﬂet

(c)

Ascending
aorta

LA

AV
Right coronary cusp
Non coronary cusp

Descending
aorta

(d)

Ventricular septum

Lateral wall
(papillary muscle
 usually not seen)

RV

RA

LV

LA

TV
Lateral leaﬂet
Septeral leaﬂet

Interatrial septum

RUPV

MV
Posterior leaﬂet

Anterior leaﬂet

Fig 3.17  Echo images. (a) A normal heart seen with the parasternal long-axis view. (b) Diagram of 
what can be seen in (a). (c) A normal heart seen in apical four-chamber view. (d) Diagram of what 
can be seen in (c).  

Reproduced from Leeson et al., Echocardiography, 2012, with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   111

_OHCM_10e.indb   111

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
 
 
112

Cardiac catheterization

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

This involves the insertion of a catheter into the heart via the femoral or radial artery 
or venous system, and manipulating it within the heart and great vessels to:
  • Inject radiopaque contrast medium to image cardiac anatomy and blood ﬂ ow, see 

ﬁ g 3.18a.

  • Perform  angioplasty  (ballooning  and  stenting),  valvuloplasty  (eg  transcatheter 
aortic  valve  implantation  (TAVI,  ﬁ g  3.45)),  cardiac  biopsies,  transcatheter  septal 
defect closure.

  • Perform electrophysiology studies and radiofrequency ablations.
  • Sample blood to assess oxygen saturation and measure pressures.
  • Perform intravascular ultrasound or echocardiography.
During the procedure, ECG and arterial pressures are monitored continuously. In the 
UK, the majority are performed as day-case procedures.
Indications
  • Coronary artery disease: diagnostic (assessment of coronary vessels and graft pa-

tency); therapeutic (angioplasty, stent insertion), ﬁ g 3.18b.

  • Valvular disease: diagnostic (pressures indicate severity); therapeutic valvuloplas-

ty (if the patient is too ill or declines valve surgery).

  • Congenital heart disease: diagnostic (assessment of severity of lesions by meas-
uring pressures and saturations); therapeutic (balloon dilatation or septostomy).

  • Other: cardiomyopathy; pericardial disease; endomyocardial biopsy.
Pre-procedure checks
  • Brief history/examination; NB: peripheral pulses, bruits, aneurysms.
  • Investigations: FBC, U&E, LFT, clotting screen, CXR, ECG.
  • Consent for procedure, including possible extra procedures, eg consent for angio-
plasty if planning to do angiography as you may ﬁ nd a lesion that needs stenting. 
Explain reason for procedure and possible complications.

  • IV access, ideally in the left hand.
  • Patient should be nil by mouth (NBM) from 6h before the procedure.
  • Patients should take all their morning drugs (and pre-medication if needed)—but 

withhold oral hypoglycaemics.

Post-procedure checks
  • Pulse, BP, arterial puncture site (for bruising or swelling), foot pulses.
  • Investigations: FBC and clotting (if suspected blood loss), ECG.
Complications
  • Haemorrhage: apply ﬁ rm pressure over puncture site. If you suspect a false aneu-
rysm, ultrasound the swelling and consider surgical repair. Haematomas are high 
risk for infections.

  • Contrast reaction: this is usually mild with modern contrast agents.
  • Loss of peripheral pulse: may be due to dissection, thrombosis, or arterial spasm. 

Occurs in <1% of brachial catheterizations. Rare with femoral catheterization.

  • Angina:  may occur during or after cardiac catheterization. Usually responds to 

sublingual GTN; if not, give analgesia and IV nitrates.

  • Arrhythmias: usually transient. Manage along standard lines.
  • Pericardial eff usion: suspect if unexplained continued chest pain. May need drain 

depending on severity and haemodynamic status.

  • Pericardial tamponade: rare, but should be suspected if the patient becomes hypo-

tensive and anuric.  Urgent pericardial drain.

  • Infection: post-catheter pyrexia is usually due to a contrast reaction. If it persists 

for >24h, take blood cultures before giving antibiotics.

Mortality <1 in 1000 patients, in most centres.
Intracardiac electrophysiology This catheter technique can determine types and 
origins of arrhythmias, and locate and ablate problem areas, eg aberrant pathways 
in WPW or arrhythmogenic foci. Arrhythmias may be induced, and the eff ectiveness 
of control by drugs assessed. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   112

_OHCM_10e.indb   112

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
113

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig 3.18  (a) Coronary artery anatomy. (b) and (c) Images from angiography. (b) shows stenosis 
of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). In (c), the same patient has had their LAD stented, al-
lowing contrast to ﬂ ow freely through to the distal vessel. The stenting is a type of angioplasty (a 
procedure to widen the lumen of a blood vessel); in the context of coronary arteries, it is called PCI 
(percutaneous coronary intervention). PPCI (primary PCI) is PCI performed acutely for a patient with 
acute coronary syndrome (ACS), see p120.

Images (b) and (c) reproduced from Ramrakha et al., Oxford Handbook of Cardiology, 2012, with permis-
sion from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   113

_OHCM_10e.indb   113

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
114

Cardiovascular drugs

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Antiplatelet drugs Aspirin irreversibly acetylates cyclo-oxygenase, preventing pro-
duction of thromboxane A2, thereby inhibiting platelet aggregation. Used in low dose 
(eg 75mg/24h PO) for secondary prevention following MI, TIA/stroke, and for patients 
with angina or peripheral vascular disease. May have a role in primary prevention.7 
ADP receptor antagonists (eg clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor) also block platelet 
aggregation, but may cause less gastric irritation. They have a role if truly intoler-
ant of aspirin; with aspirin after coronary stent insertion; and in acute coronary 
syndrome. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists (eg tiroﬁ ban) have a role in unstable 
angina/MI.8
Anticoagulants See p350. Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs, previously NOACs), eg 
Xa inhibitors (eg apixaban) and direct thrombin inhibitors (dabigatran), are increas-
ingly replacing warfarin9 for treatment of AF and clots, see p350. Warfarin remains 
the anticoagulant of choice for mechanical valves. Anticoagulants used in ACS include 
treatment dose LMWH, fondaparinux (Xa inhibitor), & bivalirudin (thrombin inhibitor).
-blockers  Block  -adrenoceptors,  thus  antagonizing  the  sympathetic  nervous 
system.  Blocking  1-receptors  is  negatively  inotropic  and  chronotropic;  blocking 
2-receptors  induces  peripheral  vasoconst riction  and  bronchoconstriction.  Drugs 
vary in their 1/2 select ivity (eg propranolol is non-selective, and bisoprolol relative-
ly 1 selective), but this does not seem to alter their clinical effi  cacy. Uses: Angina, 
hypertension, anti dysrhythmic, post MI (mortality), heart failure (with caution). CI: 
Severe asthma/COPD, heart block. SES: Lethargy, erectile dysfunction, joie de vivre, 
nightmares, headache.
ACE inhibitors These are used in hypertension (HT), heart failure, and post-MI. First 
dose HT is a concern in patients with severe CCF and malignant HT. In CCF patients, 
reduce diuretic dose initially and use long-acting ACE-i. Monitor U&E when starting or 
raising ACE-i dose, a creatinine rise of >20% is concerning. If the patient starts ACE-i 
prior to discharge, ask the GP to check U&E in 1–2 weeks. If renal function deteriorates 
markedly, consider investigating for renal artery stenosis. The risk to the kidneys is 
greater when the patient is unwell. Hold in AKI and hyperkalaemia; avoid starting if 
the patient is dehydrated. SES: Include dry cough and urticaria.
Diuretics
  • Loop diuretics (eg furosemide) are used in heart failure, and inhibit the Na/2Cl/K 

co-transporter. SES: dehydration, Na+,K+, Ca2+, ototoxic

  • Thiazides and thiazide-like diuretics are used in hypertension (eg indapamide) and 
heart failure (eg metolazone). SE: K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, urate (±gout), impotence (NB: 
small doses, eg chlortalidone 25mg/24h rarely cause signiﬁ cant SEs)

  • Potassium-sparing  diuretics:  aldosterone  antagonists  (eg  spironolactone, 
eplerenone) directly block aldosterone receptors; amiloride blocks the epithelial 
sodium channel in the distal convoluted tubules.

Vasodilators Used in heart failure, IHD, and hypertension. Nitrates (p116) preferen-
tially dilate veins and the large arteries,  ﬁ lling pressure (pre-load), while hydrala-
zine (often used with nitrates) primarily dilates the resistance vessels, thus  BP 
(after-load). Prazosin (an -blocker) dilates arteries and veins.
Calcium antagonists These  cell entry of Ca2+ via voltage-sensitive channels in 
smooth muscle, thereby promoting coronary and peripheral vasodilat ion and reduc-
ing myocardial oxygen consumption. All current drugs block L-type Ca2+ channels. 
However, their eff ects diff er because of diff erential binding properties.
  • The dihydropyridines, eg nife dipine, amlodipine, are mainly peripheral vasodilators 
(also dilate coronary arteries) and cause a reﬂ ex tachycardia, so are often used 
with a -blocker. They are used mainly in hypertension and angina.

  • The non-dihydropyridines—verapamil and diltiazem—also slow conduction at the 
AV and SA nodes and may be used to treat hypertension, angina, and dysrhythmias. 
 Don’t give non-dihydropyridines with -blockers (risk of severe bradycardia ± LVF).
SES: Flushes, headache, ankle oedema (diuretic unresponsive), LV function, gingival 
hypertrophy. CI: Heart block.

_OHCM_10e.indb   114

_OHCM_10e.indb   114

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
115

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Digoxin  Blocks the Na+/K+ pump. It is used to slow the pulse in fast AF (p130; aim for 
100). As it is a weak +ve inotrope, its role in heart failure in sinus rhythm may be 
best reserved if symptomatic despite optimal ACE-i therapy; 10 here there is little ben-
eﬁ t vis-à-vis mortality (but admissions for worsening CCF are  by ~25%).11 Elderly 
people are at risk of toxicity: use lower doses. Measure plasma levels >6h post-dose 
(p756). Typical dose: 500mcg stat PO, repeated after 12h, then 125mcg (if elderly) to 
250mcg/d PO OD (62.5mcg/d is almost never enough). IV dose: 0.75–1mg in 0.9% NaCl 
over 2h. Toxicity risk if: K+, Mg2+, or Ca2+. t½ ≈ 36h. If on digoxin, use less energy 
in  cardioversion  (start  at  5J).  If  on  amiodarone,  halve  the  dose  of  digoxin.  SES: 
Any arrhythmia (supravent ricular tachycardia with AV block is suggestive), nausea, 
appetite, yellow vision, confusion, gynaecomastia. If toxicity is suspected, do an ECG 
(ﬁ g 3.19), digoxin levels, and check K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+. If toxicity is conﬁ rmed, stop 
digoxin, correct electrolyte imbalances, treat arrhy thmias, and consider IV DigiFab® 
(p842). CIS: HCM; WPW syndrome (p133).

Fig 3.19  This ECG shows the classic ‘reverse 
tick’  of  digoxin  toxicity:  downsloping  ST 
wave with rapid upstroke back to isoelec-
tric line. The bradycardia is also suggestive 
of digoxin toxicity. 

Sodium  channel  blockers  Class  I  anti-arrhythmics.  Procainamide  (1a)  and  lido-
caine (1b) can be used to terminate VT. NB QT interval may be prolonged. Flecainide 
(1c) is useful for AF cardioversion in patients without contraindications, and for ar-
rhythmia prophylaxis in patients with WPW or troublesome paroxysmal AF. CIS: Heart 
failure, IHD, valve disease, and heart block.
Amiodarone A class III anti-arrhythmic. Amiodarone prolongs the cardiac action 
potential, reducing the potential for tachyarrhythmias. Used in both supra-ventric-
ular and ventricular tachycardias, including during cardiac arrest. Broad range of 
side  eff ects  incl.  thyroid  disease,  liver  disease,  pulmonary  ﬁ brosis  and  peripheral 
neuropathy. Monitor TFTs and LFTs every 6 months.
Ivabradine Blocks the pacemaker ‘funny current’, slowing pulse rate without sig-
niﬁ cantly dropping blood pressure. Used in angina, heart failure, and (off -licence) 
in autonomic tachycardia syndromes. CIS: Acute MI, bradycardia, long QT syndrome, 
shock. Many drug interactions, including with calcium antagonists.
Statins Statins (eg simvastatin, p690) inhibit the enzyme HMG-COA reductase, which 
causes de novo synthesis of cholesterol in the liver. This increases LDL receptor ex-
pression  by  hepatocytes  leading  to  circulating  LDL  cholesterol.  More  eff ective  if 
given at night, but optimum dose and target plasma cholesterol are unknown. SES: 
Muscle aches, abdominal discomfort, transaminases (eg ALT), CK, myositis, rarely 
rhabdo myolysis (more common if used with ﬁ brates). Statins are generally well tol-
erated. There are currently ~3 million people taking statins in England, which saves 
~10 000 lives a year. See also hyperlipidaemia, pp690–1, ﬁ g 14.13.
Anti-anginal drugs p116. Antihypertensives p140.

Drugs that slow conduction through the atrioventricular node
Drugs that slow conduction through the atrioventricular node (AVN) include di-
goxin, verapamil, and adenosine. Uses include cardioverting AVNRT and diagnos-
ing atrial tachycardias.

Drugs that slow  AVN conduction should be avoided in patients with aberrant 
pathways (eg WPW) as blocking the AVN can increase conduction via the alterna-
tive pathways. AVN blockers are contraindicated in patients with or at risk of VT, eg 
those with long QT syndrome.

_OHCM_10e.indb   115

_OHCM_10e.indb   115

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
116

Angina pectoris

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

If ACS is a possible diagnosis (including unstable angina), see pp798–801.
Angina12 is symptomatic reversible myocardial ischaemia. Features:

1      Constricting/heavy discomfort to the chest, jaw, neck, shoulders, or arms.
2      Symptoms brought on by exertion.
3      Symptoms relieved within 5min by rest or GTN.

All 3 features = typical angina; 2 features = atypical angina; 0–1 features = non-
anginal chest pain.
Other precipitants: emotion, cold weather, and heavy meals. Associated symptoms: 
dyspnoea, nausea, sweatiness, faintness. Features that make angina less likely: pain 
that is continuous, pleuritic or worse with swallowing; pain associated with palpita-
tions, dizziness or tingling.
Causes Atheroma. Rarely: anaemia; coronary artery spasm; AS; tachyarrhythmias; 
HCM; arteritis/small vessel disease (microvascular angina/cardiac syndrome X).
Types of angina Stable angina: Induced by eff ort, relieved by rest. Good prognosis. 
Unstable angina: (Crescendo angina.) Angina of increasing frequency or severity; 
occurs on minimal exertion or at rest; associated with risk of MI. Decubitus angina: 
Precipitated by lying ﬂ at. Variant (Prinzmetal) angina: (BOX ‘Vasospastic angina’) 
Caused by coronary artery spasm (rare; may coexist with ﬁ xed stenoses).
Tests ECG usually normal, but may show ST depression; ﬂ at or inverted T waves; signs 
of past MI. Blood tests: FBC, U&E, TFTs, lipids, HbA1c. Consider echo and chest X-ray. 
Further investigations are usually necessary to conﬁ rm an IHD diagnosis—see BOX.
Management
Address exacerbating factors: Anaemia, tachycardia (eg fast AF), thyrotoxicosis.
Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease:
  • Stop smoking; exercise; dietary advice; optimize hypertension and diabetes control.
  • 75mg aspirin daily if not contraindicated.
  • Address hyperlipidaemia—see p690.
  • Consider ACE inhibitors, eg if diabetic.
PRN symptom relief: Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray or sublingual tabs. Advise the pa-
tient to repeat the dose if the pain has not gone after 5min and to call an ambulance 
if the pain is still present 5min after the second dose. SE: headaches, BP.
Anti-anginal medication: (p114) First line: -blocker and/or calcium channel blocker 
(do  not  combine  -blockers  with  non-dihydropyridine  calcium  antagonists).  If 
these fail to control symptoms or are not tolerated, trial other agents.
  • -blockers: eg atenolol 50mg BD or bisoprolol 5–10mg OD.
  • Calcium antagonists:  amlodipine—start at 5mg  OD; diltiazem—dose depends on 

formulation.

  • Long-acting  nitrates:  eg  isosorbide  mononitrate—starting  regimen  depends  on 

formulation. Alternatives: GTN skin patches. SES: headaches, BP.

  • Ivabradine: reduces heart rate with minimal impact on BP. Patient must be in sinus 

rhythm. Start with 5mg BD (2.5mg in elderly).

  • Ranolazine: inhibits late Na+ current. Start at 375mg BD. Caution if heart failure, 

elderly, weight <60kg or prolonged QT interval.

  • Nicorandil: a K+ channel activator. Start with 5–10mg BD. CI: acute pulmonary oede-

ma, severe hypotension, hypovolaemia, LV failure.

Revascularization: Considered when optimal medical therapy proves inadequate.
  • Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI): (p112) a balloon is inﬂ ated inside the 
stenosed vessel, opening the lumen. A stent is usually inserted to reduce the risk 
of re-stenosis. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT; usually aspirin and clopidogel) is 
recommended for at least 12 months after stent insertion to reduce the risk of in-
stent thrombosis. Specialist advice should be sought regarding antiplatelets if the 
patient has a high bleeding risk or requires surgery.

  • CABG: (p123) compared to PCI, patients undergoing CABG are less likely to need re-
peat revascularization and those with multivessel disease can expect better out-
comes. However, CABG is open heart surgery and so recovery is slower and the 
patient is left with two large wounds (sternal and vein harvesting).

_OHCM_10e.indb   116

_OHCM_10e.indb   116

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
117

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Investigating patients with ? stable angina
Investigations for ischaemic heart disease (IHD) include:
  • Exercise ECG—assess for ischaemic ECG changes.
  • Angiography—either using cardiac CT with contrast, or transcatheter angiogra-

phy (more invasive but can be combined with stenting, p112).

  • Functional imaging (see p108): myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, stress echo 

(echo whilst undergoing exercise or receiving dobutamine), cardiac MRI.

NICE recommend the following investigations when considering stable angina.13
Typical angina in a patient with previously proven IHD:
Treat as stable angina; if further conﬁ rmation is required, use non-invasive testing, 
eg exercise ECG.
Typical and atypical angina:
CT angiography, ﬁ g 3.20. If inconclusive, use functional imaging as 2nd line and 
transcatheter angiography as 3rd line.
Non-anginal chest pain:
Does the patient have ischaemic changes on 12 lead ECG?
  • Yes: investigate as per typical and atypical angina
  • No: no further investigations for IHD at this point (unless high clinical suspicion 
of IHD for other reasons—discuss with a specialist). Ensure alternative chest pain 
diagnoses are adequately explored.  

These are guidelines and must be interpreted within the clinical context.
Further investigations:
If the patient has typical angina but few risk factors for IHD, be sure to look for 
possible  precipitating  or  exacerbating  factors,  for  example  severe  anaemia  or 
cardiomyopathy.

Fig 3.20  CT angiogram data has been used to construct this 3D image. The white arrow points 
to an obstruction of the right coronary artery

Reprinted from Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 52(3), MM Henneman et al., Noninva-
sive Evaluation With Multislice Computed Tomography in Suspected Acute Coronary Syndrome, 216–22, 
2008, with permission from Elsevier.

Vasospastic angina (Prinzmetal angina)
Angina due to coronary artery spasm, which can occur even in normal coronary 
arteries. The pain usually occurs during rest and resolves rapidly with short-acting 
nitrates (eg GTN spray). ECG during pain shows ST segment elevation.
Risks and triggers: Smoking increases risk but hypertension and hypercholester-
olaemia do not. Probable triggers include cocaine, amphetamine, marijuana, low 
magnesium, and artery instrumentation (eg during angiography).
Treatment: Avoid triggers. Correct low magnesium. Stop smoking. PRN GTN. Cal-
cium channel blockers ± long-acting nitrates. Avoid non-selective -blockers, aspi-
rin, and triptans. Prognosis is usually very good.

_OHCM_10e.indb   117

_OHCM_10e.indb   117

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
118

Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Deﬁ nitions ACS includes unstable angina and myocardial infarctions (MIs). These 
share a common underlying pathology—plaque rupture, thrombosis, and inﬂ amma-
tion. However, ACS may rarely be due to emboli, coronary spasm, or vasculitis (p556) 
in normal coronary arteries. Myocardial infarction means there is myocardial cell 
death, releasing troponin. Ischaemia means a lack of blood supply, ±cell death. MIS 
have troponin rises, unstable angina does not. An MI may be a STEMI—ACS with ST-
segment elevation (may only be present in V7–V9 if posterior STEMI) or new-onset 
LBBB; or an NSTEMI—trop-positive ACS without ST-segment elevation—the ECG may 
show ST depression, T-wave inversion, non-speciﬁ c changes, or be normal. The de-
gree of irreversible myocyte death varies, and signiﬁ cant necrosis can occur without 
ST elevation.
Risk factors Non-modiﬁ able: age,  gender, family history of IHD (MI in 1st-degree 
relative  <55yrs).  Modiﬁ able:  smoking,  hypertension,  DM,  hyperlipid aemia,  obesity, 
sedentary  lifestyle,  cocaine  use.  Controversial  risk  factors  include:  stress,  type  A 
personality, LVH, ﬁ brinogen, hyperinsulinaemia, homocysteine levels, ACE genotype.
Incidence 5/1000 per annum (UK) for ST-segment elevation (declining in UK & USA).
Diagnosis An increase in cardiac biomarkers (eg troponin) and either: symptoms of 
ischaemia, ECG changes of new ischaemia, development of pathological Q waves, new 
loss of myocardium, or regional wall motion abnormalities on imaging.
Symptoms Acute central chest pain, lasting >20min, often associated with nausea, 
sweatiness, dyspnoea, palpitations. ACS without chest pain is called ‘silent’; mostly 
seen in elderly and diabetic patients. Silent MIs may present with: syncope, pulmo-
nary oedema, epigastric pain and vomiting, post-operative hypotension or oliguria, 
acute confusional state, stroke, and diabetic hyperglycaemic states.
Signs Distress, anxiety, pallor, sweatiness, pulse  or , BP  or , 4th heart sound. 
There may be signs of heart failure (JVP, 3rd heart sound, basal crepitations) or a 
pansystolic murmur (papillary muscle dysfunction/rupture,  VSD). Low-grade fever 
may be present. Later, a pericardial friction rub or peripheral oedema may develop.
Tests ECG: (See ﬁ g 3.21.) STEMI: classically, hyperacute (tall) T waves, ST elevation, 
or new LBBB occur within hours. T-wave inversion and pathological Q waves follow 
over hours to days (p98). NSTEMI/unstable angina: ST depression, T wave inversion, 
non-speciﬁ c  changes,  or  normal.  In  20%  of  MI,  the  ECG  may  be  normal  initially. 
Paced ECGs and ECGs with chronic bundle branch block are unhelpful for diagnos-
ing NSTEMIs14 and may hinder STEMI15 diagnosis; in these cases, clinical assessment 
and troponin levels are especially important. CXR: Look for cardiomegaly, pulmonary 
oedema, or a widened mediastinum. Don’t routinely delay treatment whilst waiting 
for a CXR. Blood: FBC, U&E, glucose, lipids, cardiac enzymes. Cardiac enzymes: (See 
BOX ’Troponin‘.) Cardiac troponin levels (T and  I) are the most sensitive and spe-
ciﬁ c markers of myocardial necrosis. Diff erent hospitals use diff erent assays: check 
the required timing of troponin blood samples where you work (eg two samples 3h 
apart). Other cardiac enzymes (see ﬁ g 3.22) are sensitive but less speciﬁ c; their role 
in  ACS  diagnosis  is  decreasing  as  troponin  testing  improves.  Echo:  Regional  wall 
abnormalities.
Diff  erential  diagnosis  (p94.)  Stable  angina,  pericarditis,  myocarditis,  Takotsubo 
cardiomyopathy (p145), aortic dissection (p655), PE, oesophageal reﬂ ux/spasm, pneu-
mothorax, musculoskeletal pain, pancreatitis.
Management See p120, pp798–801.
Mortality 50% of deaths occur within 2h of onset of symptoms. Up to 7% die before 
discharge. Worse prognosis if: elderly, LV failure, and ST changes. 16

_OHCM_10e.indb   118

_OHCM_10e.indb   118

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
Fig 3.21  Sequential ECG changes following acute MI.

119

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.22  Enzyme changes following acute  MI. Increasingly, high-sensitivity troponins are used 
alone for routine investigation of ACS. 

Troponin
Troponins  are  proteins  involved  in  cardiac  and  skeletal  muscle  contraction 
(ﬁ g 3.23). When myocardial cells are damaged, troponins are released and en-
ter the bloodstream. The levels of troponin in the blood can therefore help with 
diagnosing myocardial damage. Troponins I and T are most speciﬁ c to the heart.

Troponin levels are most commonly measured when ACS is suspected. In this 
circumstance, one would expect troponin levels to rise in the hours following the 
insult (ﬁ g 3.22). Troponin levels can be high with other causes of myocardial dam-
age, for example myocarditis, pericarditis, and ventricular strain. With these con-
ditions, the troponin levels are likely to change little hour by hour as the insults are 
ongoing. Discrete episodes of tachyarrhythmias may cause troponin rises similar 
to in ACS. Troponin levels can also be raised iatrogenically, eg following  CPR, DC 
cardioversion, ablation therapy.

A troponin rise may have a non-cardiac aetiology. This can be indirectly related 
to the heart, eg a massive PE causing right ventricular strain, or have no clear car-
diac connection, eg subarachnoid haemorrhage, burns, or sepsis. A common cause 
of consistently elevated troponin is renal failure. Hence, when measuring troponin, 
change in level is often more important than the level itself. 

Fig 3.23  Diagram of myocardial contraction unit. The troponin complex controls when the myo-
sin heads can bind to the actin chain, shortening the muscle ﬁ bre.
Reproduced from Barnard et al., Cardiac Anaesthesia, 2010, with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   119

_OHCM_10e.indb   119

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
120

Management of ACS 
ACS management depends on whether the ACS is ‘ST elevated’ or not:

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

1      ST elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI): this category includes ACS with ST el-
evation on ECG (ﬁ g 3.9) but also ACS with new LBBB (ﬁ g 3.7); and posterior MIs 
(ﬁ g 3.24) where ST elevation may only be seen with extra leads (V7–V9). Urgent 
revascularization is essential. p796.

2      ACS without ST elevation: serial troponins are needed to diff erentiate non-ST el-
evated MIs (NSTEMIs) (trop rise) from unstable angina (no trop rise). p798.
After the immediate actions described on pp796–9, treatment of  ACS17 focuses on 
managing symptoms, secondary prevention of further cardiovascular disease, revas-
cularization (if not already undertaken), and addressing complications.
Symptom control
Manage chest pain with PRN GTN and opiates. If this proves insuffi  cient, consider a 
GTN infusion (monitor BP, omit if recent sildenaﬁ l use). If pain is deteriorating, seek 
senior help. Manage symptomatic heart failure, p136.
Modify risk factors
  • Patients should be strongly advised and helped to stop smoking (p93).
  • Identify and treat diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidaemia.
  • Advise a diet high in oily ﬁ sh, fruit, vegetables, & ﬁ bre, and low in saturated fats.
  • Encourage daily exercise. Refer to a cardiac rehab programme.
  • Mental health: ﬂ ag to the patient’s GP if depression or anxiety are present—these 

are independently associated with poor cardiovascular outcomes.

Optimize cardioprotective medications
  • Antiplatelets: aspirin (75mg OD) and a second antiplatelet agent (eg clopidogrel) 
for at least 12 months to vascular events (eg MI, stroke). Consider adding a PPI (eg 
lansoprazole) for gastric protection.

  • Anticoagulate, eg with fondaparinux, until discharge.
  • -blockade  reduces  myocardial  oxygen  demand.  Start  low  and  increase  slowly, 

monitoring pulse and BP. If contraindicated, consider verapamil or diltiazem.

  • ACE-i in patients with LV dysfunction, hypertension, or diabetes unless not tolerated 

(consider ARB). Titrate up slowly, monitoring renal function.

  • High-dose statin, eg atorvastatin 80mg.
  • Do an echo to assess LV function. Eplerenone improves outcomes in MI patients 

with heart failure (ejection fraction <40%).

Revascularization
  • STEMI patients and very high-risk NSTEMI patients (eg haemodynamically unstable) 
should receive immediate angiography ± PCI. NSTEMI patients who are high risk (eg 
GRACE score >140) should have angiography within 24h; intermediate risk (eg GRACE 
109–140) within 3d; low-risk patients may be considered for non-invasive testing.
  • Patients with multivessel disease may be considered for CABG instead of PCI (p123).
Manage complications See p122.
Discharge Address any questions the patient has. Discuss ‘red ﬂ ag’ symptoms and 
where to seek medical advice should they arise. Ensure the management plan is 
communicated to the patient’s GP. Book clinic and cardiac rehab appointments.
General advice
  • Driving:18 drivers with group 1 licences (car and motorcycle) can resume driving 
1wk after successful angioplasty, or 4wk after ACS without successful angioplasty, 
if their ejection fraction is >40%. Group 2 licence holders must inform the DVLA of 
their ACS and stop driving; depending on the results of functional tests, they may 
be able to restart after 6wk.

  • Work: how soon a patient can return to work will depend on their clinical progress 
and the nature of their work. They should be encouraged to discuss speed of return 
± changes in duties (eg to lighter work if manual labour) with their employer. Some 
occupations cannot be restarted post-MI: eg airline pilots & air traffi  c controllers. 
Drivers of public service or heavy goods vehicles will have to undergo functional 
testing (eg exercise test), as mentioned previously.

_OHCM_10e.indb   120

_OHCM_10e.indb   120

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

2

2

1

1

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.24  Acute postero-lateral MI. The posterior infarct is evidenced by the reciprocal changes seen in V1–3: dominant R waves (‘upside-down’ pathological Q waves) 
and ST depression (‘upside-down’ ST elevation). If extra chest leads were added (V7–9), we would see the classic ST elevation pattern, see p 98. The ST elevation in V6 sug-
gests lateral infarction. A blockage in the circumﬂ ex coronary artery could explain both the posterior and lateral changes.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
2
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122

Complications of MI

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Cardiac arrest (See p894, ﬁ g A3.) Cardiogenic shock (p802.) Left ventricular 
failure (p136, p800, p802.)
Bradyarrhythmias Sinus bradycardia: See p808. Patients with inferior MIs may 
suff er atropine-unresponsive bradycardia due to infarction of nodal tissue. 1st-de-
gree AV block: Most commonly seen in inferior MI. Observe closely as approximately 
40% develop higher degrees of AV block (in which case calcium channel blockers and 
-blockers should be stopped). Wenckebach phenomenon: (Mobitz type I) Does not 
require pacing unless poorly tolerated. Mobitz type II block: Carries a high risk of 
developing sudden complete AV block; should be paced. Complete AV block: Usually 
resolves within a few days. Insert pacemaker (may not be necessary after inferior 
MI  if  narrow  QRS,  reasonably  stable  and  pulse  40–50).  Bundle  branch  block:  MI 
complicated by trifascicular block or non-adjacent bifascicular disease (p132) should 
be paced.
Tachyarrhythmias NB: K+, hypoxia, and acidosis all predispose to arrhythmias and 
should be corrected. Sinus tachycardia: Can  myocardial O2 demand, treat causes 
(pain, hypoxia, sepsis, etc.) and add -blocker if not contraindicated. SVT: p126.  AF 
or  ﬂ utter:  If  compromised,  DC  cardioversion.  Otherwise,  medical  therapy  as  per 
p130. Frequent PVCs (premature ventricular complexes) and non-sustained VT (≥3 
consecutive PVCS >100bpm and lasting <30s) are common after acute MI and are as-
sociated with increased risk of sudden death. Correct hypokalaemia and hypomag-
nesaemia and ensure the patient is on -blockers, if not contraindicated.19 Sustained 
VT: (Consecutive PVCS >100bpm and lasting >30s.) Treat with synchronized DC shock 
(if no pulse, treat as per advanced life support algorithm, see p894,  ﬁ g  A3). Use 
anti-arrhythmics only if VT recurrent and not controlled with shocks. Consider abla-
tion +/or ICD. Ventricular ﬁ brillation: 80% occurs within 12h. VF occuring after 48h 
usually indicates pump failure or cardiogenic shock. : DC shock (see p894, ﬁ g A3), 
consider ICD.
Right ventricular failure (RVF)/infarction Presents with low cardiac output and 
JVP. Fluid is key; avoid vasodilators (eg nitrates) and diuretics.20 Inotropes are re-
quired in some cases.
Pericarditis Central chest pain, relieved by sitting forwards. ECG: saddle-shaped ST 
elevation, see ﬁ g 3.51, p155. Treatment: NSAIDS. Echo to check for eff usion.
Systemic embolism May arise from LV mural thrombus. After large anterior MI, 
consider anticoagulation with warfarin for 3 months.
Cardiac tamponade (p802) Presents with low cardiac output, pulsus paradoxus, 
Kussmaul’s sign,3 muffl  ed heart sounds. Diagnosis: echo. Treatment: pericardial aspi-
ration (provides temporary relief, see p773 for technique), surgery.
Mitral regurgitation May be mild (minor papillary muscle dysfunction) or severe 
(chordal or papillary muscle rupture secondary to ischaemia). Presentation: pulmo-
nary oedema. Treat LVF (p800) and consider valve replacement.
Ventricular septal defect Presents with pansystolic murmur, JVP, cardiac failure. 
Diagnosis: echo. Treatment: surgery. 50% mortality in ﬁ rst week.
Late malignant ventricular arrhythmias Occur 1–3wks post-MI and are the cardi-
ologist’s nightmare. Avoid hypokalaemia, the most easily avoidable cause. Consider 
24h ECG monitoring prior to discharge if large MI.
Dressler’s syndrome (p698) Recurrent pericarditis, pleural eff usions, fever, anae-
mia, and ESR 1–3wks post-MI. Treatment: consider NSAIDS; steroids if severe.
Left ventricular aneurysm This occurs late (4–6wks post-MI), and presents with 
LVF, angina, recurrent VT, or systemic embolism. ECG: persistent ST-segment elevation. 
Treatment: anticoagulate, consider excision.

3  JVP rises during inspiration. Adolf Kussmaul was a prominent 19th-century physician and the ﬁ rst to 
attempt gastroscopy. Inspired by a sword swallower he passed a rigid tube into the stomach, however light 
technology was limited and it was not until years later that gastroscopists could visualize the stomach. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   122

_OHCM_10e.indb   122

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
123

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
CABG  is  performed  in  left  main  stem  disease;  multi-vessel  disease;  multiple  se-
vere stenoses; patients unsuitable for angioplasty; failed angioplasty; refractory 
angina.
Indications for CABG—to improve survival:
  • Left main stem disease.
  • Triple-vessel disease involving proximal part of the left anterior descending.
Indications for CABG—to relieve symptoms:
  • Angina unresponsive to drugs.
  • Unstable angina (sometimes).
  • If angioplasty is unsuccessful.
NB: when CABG and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI, eg angioplasty) are 
both clinically valid options, NICE recommends that the availability of new stent 
technology should push the decision towards PCI. In practice, patients with single-
vessel coronary artery disease and normal LV function usually undergo PCI, and 
those with triple-vessel disease and abnormal  LV function more often undergo 
CABG. 
Compared with PCI, CABG results in longer recovery time and length of inpatient 
stay. Recent RCTs indicate that early procedural mortality rates and 5-year survival 
rates are similar after PCI and CABG. Compared with PCI, CABG probably provides 
more complete long-term relief of angina in patients, and less repeated revascu-
larization.
Procedure: The heart is usually stopped and blood pumped artiﬁ cially by a ma-
chine outside the body (cardiac bypass). Minimally invasive thoracotomies not 
requiring this are well described, 21 but randomized trials are few. The patient’s 
own saphenous vein or internal mammary artery is used as the graft. Several 
grafts may be placed. >50% of vein grafts close in 10yrs (low-dose aspirin helps 
prevent this). Internal mammary artery grafts last longer (but may cause chest-
wall numbness).
On-pump or off-pump:
Seems to make little diff erence. 22
After CABG: If angina persists or recurs (from poor graft run-off , distal disease, 
new  atheroma,  or  graft  occlusion)  restart  antianginal  drugs,  and  consider  an-
gioplasty. Ensure optimal management of hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipi-
daemia,  and  that  smoking  is  addressed.  Continue  aspirin  75mg  OD  indeﬁ nitely; 
consider clopidogrel if aspirin contraindicated. Mood, sex, and intellectual prob-
lems 23 are common early. Rehabilitation helps:
  • Exercise: walkcycleswimjog.
  • Drive at 1 month: no need to tell DVLA if non-HGV licences, p158.
  • Return to work, eg at 3 months.

_OHCM_10e.indb   123

_OHCM_10e.indb   123

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
124

Arrhythmias—overview 

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Disturbances of cardiac rhythm (arrhythmias) are:
  • common
  • often benign (but may reﬂ ect underlying heart disease)
  • often intermittent, causing diagnostic diffi  culty see BOX ‘Continuous ECG monitoring’
  • occasionally severe, causing cardiac compromise which may be fatal.
Emergency management: pp804–9.
Causes Cardiac: Ischaemic heart disease (IHD); structural changes, eg left atrial 
dilatation  secondary  to  mitral  regurgitation;  cardiomyopathy;  pericarditis;  myo-
carditis; aberrant conduction pathways. Non-cardiac: Caff eine; smoking; alcohol; 
pneumonia; drugs (2-agonists, digoxin, L-dopa, tricyclics, doxorubicin); metabolic 
imbalance (K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, hypoxia, hypercapnia, metabolic acidosis, thyroid disease); 
and phaeochromocytoma.
Presentation Palpitations, chest pain, presyncope/syncope, hypotension, or pulmo-
nary oedema. Some arrhythmias may be asymptomatic, incidental ﬁ ndings, eg AF.
History Take a detailed history of palpitations (p36). Ask about precipitating fac-
tors, onset/off set, nature (fast or slow, regular or irregular), duration, associated 
symptoms  (chest  pain,  dyspnoea,  collapse).  Review  drug  history.  Ask  about  past 
medical history and family history of cardiac disease and sudden death. Syncope 
occuring  during  exercise  is  always  concerning;  the  patient  may  have  a  condition 
predisposing them to sudden cardiac death (eg long QT syndrome).
Tests FBC, U&E, glucose, Ca2+, Mg2+, TSH, ECG: Look for signs of IHD, AF, short PR interval 
(WPW syndrome), long QT interval (metabolic imbalance, drugs, congenital), U waves 
(hypokalaemia).  24h  ECG  monitoring  or  other  continuous  ECG  monitoring  (see  BOX  
‘Continuous  ECG  monitoring’).  Echo  to  look  for  structural  heart  disease,  eg  mitral 
stenosis,  HCM.  Provocation  tests:  exercise  ECG,  cardiac  catheterization  ±  electro-
physiological studies may be needed.
Narrow complex tachycardias: See pp806–7, 126.
Atrial ﬁ brillation and ﬂ utter: See pp806–7, 130.
Broad complex tachycardias: See pp804–5, 128.
Bradycardia: See p808 (causes and management of acute bradycardia) and p98 
(heart block). Intermittent, self-resolving bradycardic episodes can cause signiﬁ cant 
problems (eg recurrent syncope). Continuous ECG monitoring (BOX ‘Continuous ECG 
monitoring’)  will  be  needed  to  assist  the  diagnosis  ±specialist  tests  (eg  tilt  table 
testing for reﬂ ex syncope). Seek out reversible causes, eg hypothyroidism or medica-
tions such as -blockers. In some cases, no reversible cause is found and the inter-
mittent bradycardia is suffi  ciently dangerous to warrant a permanent pacemaker 
(p132). See BOX, ‘Sick sinus syndrome’.
Management Some arrhythmias can be managed conservatively, eg by reducing 
alcohol intake. Many arrhythmias respond to medical  management with regular 
tablets or a ‘pill in the pocket’. Interventional management may include pacemakers 
(p132), ablation (eg of accessory pathways or arrhythmogenic foci), or implantable 
cardioverter deﬁ brillators (ICDs), eg in patients with ventricular arrhythmias post-MI 
and in those with congenital arrhythmogenic conditions (p133). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   124

_OHCM_10e.indb   124

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
125

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Continuous ECG monitoring
A simple 12-lead ECG only gives a snapshot of the heart’s electrical activities. Many 
disorders, particularly the arrhythmias, come and go and so may be missed at the 
time of the ECG recording. If you feel you are missing a paroxysmal arrhythmia, 
there are many ways of recording the electrical activity over a longer period:
Telemetry: An inpatient wears ECG leads and the signals are shown on screens 
being watched by staff . Thus, if a dangerous arrhythmia occurs, help is immedi-
ately available. This is very resource intensive so reserved for those at high risk of 
dangerous arrhythmias, eg immediately post-STEMI.
Exercise  ECGs:  The  patient  exercises  according  to  a  standardized  protocol  (eg 
Bruce on a treadmill) and the  BP and  ECG are monitored, looking for ischaemic 
changes, arrhythmias, and features suggestive of arrhythmia risk, such as delta 
waves.
Holter monitors: The patient wears an ECG monitor which records their rhythm 
for 24h–7d whilst they go about their normal life, this is later analysed. These can 
also be used to pick up ST changes suggestive of ischaemia.
Loop recorders: These record only 
when  activated  by  the  patient—
they cleverly save a small amount 
of ECG data before the event—use-
ful  if  the  arrhythmia  causes  loss 
of  consciousness:  the  patient  can 
press the button when they wake 
up.  Loop  recorders  may  be  im-
planted just under the skin (eg Re-
veal® or the newer, injectable LINQ 
device), and are especially useful in 
patients with infrequent episodes 
as they can continually monitor for 
months or years awaiting an event 
(Fig 3.25).
Pacemakers  and  ICDs:  These  re-
cord  details  of  cardiac  electrical 
activity  and  device  activity.  This 
information  can  be  useful  for  es-
tablishing an arrhythmic origin for 
symptoms.

Fig 3.25  This is a recording from a loop recorder, each 
line follows on from the one above. This tracing was 
recorded at the time of a syncopal episode, it shows 
cardiac slowing then a 15sec pause: quite long enough 
to cause syncope! But not long enough to arrange a 
standard ECG, even if the patient were in hospital.

Reproduced from Camm et al., ESC Textbook of Cardio-
vascular Medicine, 2009, with permission from Oxford 
University Press. 

Sick sinus syndrome
Sick sinus syndrome is usually caused by sinus node ﬁ brosis, typically in elderly 
patients.  The  sinus  node  becomes  dysfunctional,  in  some  cases  slowing  to  the 
point of sinus bradycardia or sinus pauses, in others generating tachyarrhythmias 
such as atrial ﬁ brillation and atrial tachycardia.
Symptoms: Syncope and pre-syncope, light-headedness, palpitations, breathless-
ness.
Management:
  • Thromboembolism prophylaxis if episodes of AF are detected.
  • Permanent  pacemakers  for  patients  with  symptomatic  bradycardia  or  sinus 

pauses.

Some  patients  develop  a  ‘tachy  brady  syndrome’,  suff ering  from  alternating 
tachycardic and bradycardic rhythms. This can prove diffi  cult to treat medically 
as treating one circumstance (eg tachycardia) increases the risk from the other. 
Pacing for bradycardic episodes in combination with rate-slowing medications for 
tachycardic episodes may be required if the patient is symptomatic or unstable.

_OHCM_10e.indb   125

_OHCM_10e.indb   125

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
126

Narrow complex tachycardia

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Deﬁ nition ECG shows rate of >100bpm and QRS complex duration of <120ms. Narrow 
QRS complexes occur when the ventricles are depolarized via the normal conduction 
pathways (ﬁ g 3.26).
Diff  erential diagnosis
Regular narrow complex tachycardias: See ﬁ g 3.27.
Irregular narrow complex tachycardias:
  • Normal variant: sinus arrhythmia (rate changes with inspiration/expiration); sinus 

rhythm with frequent ectopic beats.

  • Atrial ﬁ brillation (AF): p131, ﬁ g 3.35.
  • Atrial ﬂ utter with variable block: eg P–P–P–QRS–P–P–QRS (3:1 block then 2:1 block). 
The atrial rhythm is regular but the ventricular rhythm (hence pulse) is irregular.
  • Multifocal atrial tachycardia: like focal atrial tachycardia but there are multiple 
groups of atrial cells taking it in turns to initiate a cardiac cycle. P-wave morphol-
ogy and P-P intervals vary. Usually associated with COPD.

Principles of management See p807.
If the patient is compromised, use DC cardioversion (p770).
  • Identify and treat the underlying rhythm: eg treating sinus tachycardia secondary 
to dehydration with IV ﬂ uids; treating multifocal sinus tachycardia secondary to 
COPD by correcting hypoxia and hypercapnia; treating focal atrial tachycardia sec-
ondary to digoxin toxicity with digoxin-speciﬁ c antibody fragments; treating AVRT 
secondary to WPW with ﬂ ecainide, propafenone, or amiodarone; for atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion (AF) and ﬂ utter see p130.

  • If AVNRT or AVRT are suspected, consider transiently blocking the AVN. This should 
break the circuit of an atrio-ventricular re-entry rhythm, allowing sinus rhythm to 
re-establish. If the underlying rhythm is actually atrial in origin (eg ﬂ utter or atrial 
tachycardia), AVN blockade will not treat the rhythm but the paused ventricular 
activity will unmask the atrial rhythm (ﬁ g 3.28), aiding diagnosis and management. 
AVN blockade can be achieved by:
1      Vagal manoeuvres: carotid sinus massage, Valsalva manoeuvre (eg blowing into 

a syringe).

2      IV adenosine: see p806.

  • In some cases, narrow complex tachyarrhythmias cause symptomatic episodes of 
suffi  cient severity and frequency to warrant more invasive treatment, eg ablation 
therapy for accessory pathways. 

Fig 3.28  This patient was given adenosine for tachycardia thought to be due to AVRT or AVNRT. 
The adenosine has slowed the ventricular rate, revealing ﬂ utter waves (sawtooth appearance), 
disproving an AVRT/AVNRT diagnosis. 

Image courtesy of Dr Ed Burns, www.lifeinthefastlane.com.

Holiday heart syndrome
Binge drinking in a person without any clinical evidence of heart disease may 
result in acute cardiac rhythm and/or conduction disturbances, which is called 
holiday heart syndrome (note that recreational use of marijuana may have similar 
eff ects). The most common rhythm disorders are supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
mia and AF (consider this diagnosis in patients without structural heart disease 
who present with new-onset AF).

The prognosis is excellent, especially in young patients without structural heart 
disease. As holiday heart syndrome resolves rapidly by abstinence from alcohol 
use, advise all patients against the excessive use of alcohol in future.

_OHCM_10e.indb   126

_OHCM_10e.indb   126

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
127

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

SAN

Normal conduction
Normal conduction: initiated by the 
sinoatrial node (SAN), electrical ac-
tivity spreads around the atria. The 
atrioventricular node (AVN) receives 
this activity, pauses, then passes it 
on,  down  the  bundle  of  His  which 
splits  into  left  and  right  bundle 
branches.  These  cause  depolariza-
tion of the ventricular myocardium 
from bottom (apex) to top (outﬂ ow 
tracts).

AVN

TV

Right
bundle
branch

MV

His bundle

Left
bundle
branch

Left
anterior
and
posterior
hemi fascicle

Fig 3.26  Normal conduction. 

F

E

C

B

D

H

A

G +

Fig 3.27  Regular tachycardias. 

Regular rhythm tachycardia
See ﬁ g 3.27.
A.  Sinus  tachycardia:  Conduction 
occurs as per ﬁ g 3.26 but impulses 
are  initiated  at  a  high  frequency. 
Causes  include  infection,  pain,  ex-
ercise,  anxiety,  dehydration,  bleed, 
systemic vasodilation (eg in sepsis), 
drugs  (caff eine,  nicotine,  salbuta-
mol), anaemia, fever,  PE, hyperthy-
roidism,  pregnancy,  CO2  retention, 
autonomic neuropathy (eg inappro-
priate sinus tachycardia).
B.  Focal  atrial  tachycardia:  A 
group of atrial cells act as a pace-
maker, out-pacing the  SAN.  P-wave 
morphology (shape) is diff erent to 
sinus.
C. Atrial ﬂ utter: Electrical activity circles the atria 300 times per minute, giving a 
‘sawtooth’ baseline, see ﬁ g 3.35. The AVN passes some of these impulses on, result-
ing in ventricular rates that are factors of 300 (150, 100, 75).
D. Atrioventricular re-entry tachycardia: (AVRT) An accessory pathway (eg in 
Wolff -Parkinson-White (WPW), p133) allows electrical activity from the ventricles 
to  pass  to  the  resting  atrial  myocytes,  creating  a  circuit:  atria–AVN–ventricles–
accessory  pathway–atria.  This  direction  is  called  ‘orthodromic’  conduction  and 
results in narrow QRS complexes as ventricular depolarization is triggered via the 
bundles of His. Conduction in the other direction is called ‘antidromic’ and results 
in broad QRS complexes.
E. Atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia: (AVNRT) Circuits form within the 
AVN, causing narrow complex tachycardias. This is very common.
F. Junctional tachycardia: Cells in the AVN become the pacemaker, giving nar-
row QRS complexes as impulses reach the ventricles through the normal routes; P 
waves may be inverted and late.
G. Bundle branch block: Any of the above conditions can result in broad complex 
tachycardias if there is bundle branch block (see p100).
H.  Ventricular  tachycardia: (VT) This can result from circuits, similar to atrial 
ﬂ utter, or from focuses of rapidly-ﬁ ring cells. The QRS is broad. When a circuit 
is in action and its plane rotates, the ECG shows broad complex tachycardia with 
regularly increasing and decreasing amplitudes; this is called torsades de pointes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   127

_OHCM_10e.indb   127

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
128

Broad complex tachycardia

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Deﬁ nition ECG shows rate of >100 and QRS complexes >120ms. If no clear QRS com-
plexes, it is VF or asystole (or problems with the ECG machine or stickers).
Principles of management
If the patient is unstable or you are uncertain of what to do, get help fast—the 
patient may be periarrest (p804).
  • Identify the underlying rhythm and treat accordingly.
  • If in doubt, treat as ventricular tachycardia (VT)—the commonest cause.
  • Giving AVN blocking agents to treat SVT with aberrancy when the patient is in VT 
can cause dangerous haemodynamic instability. Treating for VT when the patient is 
actually in SVT has less potential for deterioration.

  • If WPW is suspected, avoid drugs that slow AV conduction—see p114.
Diff  erential diagnosis
  • Ventricular ﬁ brillation—chaotic, no pattern, ﬁ g 3.29.
  • Ventricular tachycardia (VT), ﬁ gs 3.12, 3.30.
  • Torsade de pointes (polymorphic VT)—VT with varying axis (see ﬁ g 3.31), may look 

like VF. QT interval is a predisposing factor.

  • Any cause of narrow complex tachycardias (p126) when in combination with bun-

dle branch block or metabolic causes of broad QRS.

  • Antidromic AVRT (eg WPW), p127.
Diff  erentiating  VT from  SVT with aberrancy This may be diffi  cult; seek expert 
help. Diagnosis is based on the history (IHD increases the likelihood of a ventricular 
arrhythmia), a 12-lead ECG, and the response (or lack thereof) to certain medications. 
ECG ﬁ ndings in favour of VT:
  • +ve or Ωve QRS concordance in all chest leads (ie all +ve (R) or all Ωve (QS)).
  • QRS >160ms.
  • Marked left axis deviation, or ‘northwest axis’ (QRS positive in aVR).
  • AV dissociation (Ps independent of QRSs) or 2:1 or 3:1 Mobitz II heart block.
  • Fusion beats or capture beats (ﬁ gs 3.32, 3.33).
  • RSR’ pattern where R is taller than R’. (R’ taller than R suggests RBBB.)
Management See page 805.
Ventricular extrasystoles (ectopics) These are common and can be symptomatic—
patients describe palpitations, a thumping sensation, or their heart ‘missing a beat’. 
The pulse may feel irregular if there are frequent ectopics. On ECG, ventricular ectop-
ics are broad QRS complexes; they may be single or occur in patterns:
  • Bigeminy—ectopic every other beat, see ﬁ g 3.34. ECG machines may disregard the 

second QRS and so calculate the rate to be half the true value.

  • Trigeminy—every third beat is an ectopic.
  • Couplet—two ectopics together.
  • Triplet—three ectopics together.
Occasional ventricular ectopics24 in otherwise healthy people are extremely common 
and rarely signiﬁ cant. Frequent ectopics (>60/hour), particularly couplets and tri-
plets, should prompt testing for underlying cardiac conditions. Post-MI, ventricular 
ectopics are associated with increased risk of dangerous arrhythmias. Pay attention 
to  whether  the  ectopics  all  ‘look’  the  same  on  the  ECG  suggesting  a  single  focus 
(monomorphic) or may come from multiple foci (polymorphic). Causes and manage-
ment can be diff erent.

_OHCM_10e.indb   128

_OHCM_10e.indb   128

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
129

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.29  VF (p894).

Fig 3.30  VT with a rate of 235/min.

Fig 3.31  Torsade de pointes tachycardia.

Fig 3.32  A fusion beat (*)—a ‘normal beat’ fuses with a VT complex creating an unusual complex.

Fig 3.33  A capture beat (*)—a normal QRS amongst runs of VT. This would not be expected if the 
QRS breadth were down to bundle branch block or metabolic causes. 

Fig 3.34  Bigeminy—a normal QRS is followed by a ventricular ectopic beat * then a compensatory 
pause, this pattern then repeats. The ectopic beats have the same morphology as each other so 
probably all share an origin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   129

_OHCM_10e.indb   129

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
130

Atrial ﬁ brillation (AF) and ﬂ utter  

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

AF25 is a chaotic, irregular atrial rhythm at 300–600bpm (ﬁ g 3.35); the  AV node re-
sponds inter mittently, hence an irregular ventricular rhythm. Cardiac output drops 
by 10–20% as the ventricles aren’t primed reliably by the atria. AF is common in the el-
derly (≤9%). The main risk is embolic stroke. Warfarin reduces this to 1%/yr from 4%. 
So, do an ECG on everyone with an irregular pulse (±24h ECG if dizzy, faints, palpita-
tions, etc.). If AF started more than 48h ago, intracardiac clots may have formed, ne-
cessitating anticoagulation prior to cardioversion. see BOX ‘Anticoagulation and AF’.
Causes Heart failure; hypertension; IHD (seen in 22% MI patients); 26 PE; mitral valve 
disease;  pneumonia;  hyperthyroidism;  caff eine;  alcohol;  post-op;  K+;  Mg2+.   Rare 
causes: Cardio myopathy; constrictive pericarditis; sick sinus syndrome; lung cancer; 
endo carditis; haemochromatosis; sarcoid. ‘Lone’ AF means no cause found.
Symptoms May be asymptomatic or cause chest pain, palpitations, dysp noea, or 
faintness. Signs Irregularly irregular pulse, the apical pulse rate is greater than 
the radial rate, and the 1st heart sound is of variable intensity; signs of LVF (p800). 
Examine the whole patient: AF is often associated with non-cardiac disease.
Tests ECG shows absent P waves, irregular QRS complexes, ﬁ g 3.35. Blood tests: U&E, 
cardiac enzymes, thyroid function tests. Echo to look for left atrial enlarge ment, 
mitral valve disease, poor LV function, and other structural abnormalities.
Managing acute AF
  • If the patient has adverse signs (shock, myocardial ischaemia (chest pain or ECG 
changes), syncope, heart failure): ABCDE, get senior input DC cardioversion (syn-
chronized shock, start at 120–150J) ± amiodarone if unsuccessful (p807); do not 
delay treatment in order to start anticoagulation.

  • If the patient is stable & AF started <48h ago: rate or rhythm control may be tried. 
For rhythm control, DC cardiovert or give ﬂ ecainide (CI: structural heart disease, 
IHD) or amiodarone. Start heparin in case cardioversion is delayed (see BOX ‘Anti-
coagulation and AF’).

  • If the patient is stable & AF started >48h ago or unclear time of onset: rate control 
(eg with bisoprolol or diltiazem). If rhythm control is chosen, the patient must be 
anticoagulated for >3wks ﬁ rst.

  • Correct electrolyte imbalances (K+, Mg2+, Ca2+);  associated illnesses (eg MI, pneu-

monia); and consider anticoagulation (see BOX ‘Anticoagulation and AF’).

Managing chronic AF
The main goals are rate control and anticoagulation. Rate control is at least as good 
as rhythm control, 27 but rhythm control may be appropriate if • symptomatic or CCF 
• younger • presenting for 1st time with lone AF • AF from a corrected precipitant (eg 
U&E). Anticoagulation: See BOX ‘Anticoagulation and AF’.
Rate control: -blocker or rate-limiting Ca2+ blocker are 1st choice. If this fails, add 
digoxin (p115), then consider amiodarone. Digoxin as monotherapy in chronic AF is 
only acceptable in sedentary patients. Do not give -blockers with verapamil. Aim 
for heart rate <90bpm at rest and 200 minus age (yrs) bpm on exertion. Avoid getting 
ﬁ xated on a target heart rate.
Rhythm control: Elective DC cardioversion: do echo ﬁ rst to check for intracardiac 
thrombi. If there is risk of cardioversion failure (past failure, or past recurrence) 
give amiodarone for 4wks before the procedure and 12 months after. Elective phar-
macological cardioversion: ﬂ ecainide is 1st choice (CI if structural heart disease, eg 
scar tissue from MI: use IV amiodarone instead). In refractory cases, AVN ablation 
with pacing, pulmonary vein ablation, or the maze procedure may be considered.28
Paroxysmal AF: ‘Pill in the pocket’ (eg sotalol or ﬂ ecainide PRN) may be tried if: infre-
q uent  AF,  BP >100mmHg  systolic,  no  past  LV  dysfunction.  Anticoagulate  (See  BOX 
‘Anticoagulation and AF’). Consider ablation if symptomatic or frequent episodes.
Atrial ﬂ utter See pp130–1, ﬁ g 3.35. Treatment: Similar to  AF regarding rate and 
rhythm control and the need for anticoagulation.29 DC cardioversion is preferred to 
pharmacological cardioversion; start with 70–120J. IV amiodarone may be needed if 
rate control is proving diffi  cult. Recurrence rates are high so radiofrequency ablation 
is often recommended for long-term management. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   130

_OHCM_10e.indb   130

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
131

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Anticoagulation and AF
Acute AF: Use heparin until a full risk assessment for emboli (see below) is made—
eg AF started <48h ago and elective cardioversion is being planned. If >48h, ensure 
≥3wks of therapeutic anticoagulation before elective cardio version; NB trans-oe-
sophageal-guided cardioversion is an option if urgent cardioversion is required. 
Use a DOAC (eg apixaban) or warfarin (target INR 2–3) if high risk of emboli (past 
ischaemic stroke, TIA, or emboli; 75yrs with BP, DM; coronary or peripheral arte-
rial disease; evidence of valve disease or LV function/CCF—only do echo if unsure). 30 
Use no anticoagulation if stable sinus rhythm has been restored, no risk factors 
for emboli, and AF recurrence unlikely (ie no failed cardioversions, no structural 
heart disease, no previous recurrences, no sustained AF for >1yr).
Chronic  AF:  Chronic  AF  may  be  paroxysmal  (terminates  in <7d  but  may  recur), 
persistent (lasts >7d), or permanent (long-term, continuous AF, sinus rhythm not 
achievable despite treatment). In all cases, the need for anticoagulation should be 
assessed using the CHA2DS2-VASc score to assess embolic stroke risk (consider anti-
coagulation if score  >0,  >1), and balancing this against the risks of anticoagula-
tion to the patient, assessed with the HAS-BLED score. Long-term anticoagulation 
should be with a DOAC (see p350) or warfarin.
CHA2DS2-VASc—Congestive  cardiac  failure  (1  point),  Hypertension  (1),  Age 
65–74y (1), Age >74y (2), Diabetes (1), previous Stroke/TIA/thromboembolism (2), 
Vascular disease (1), Sex Category (1 if female). A score of 2 = an annual stroke risk 
of 2.2%. Online calculators can be helpful, eg www.mdcalc.com.
HAS-BLED—1 point for each of: • labile INR • age >65 • use of medications that can 
predispose to bleeding (eg  NSAIDs, anti-platelets) • alcohol abuse • uncontrolled 
hypertension • history of, or predisposition to, major bleeding • renal disease • liver 
disease • stroke history.

Pre-excited AF

In pre-excited AF, accessory pathways capable of conducting at rapid rates (eg 
sometimes in WPW syndrome) pass erratic electrical activity from the atria to the 
ventricles, unﬁ ltered by the AVN. ECGs will show irregular, broad QRS complexes at 
>200bpm. Ventricles cannot sustain this rate for long; the patient is at high risk 
of VT and VF.

(a)

(b)

(c)

QRS

QRS

PPP

P

Fig 3.35  (a) AF: note the irregular spacing of QRS complexes and lack of P waves. (b) AF with a rapid 
ventricular response (sometimes referred to as ‘fast AF’). No pattern to QRS complex spacing, and 
rate >100bpm. (c) Atrial ﬂ utter with 2:1 block (2 P waves for every 1 QRS complex). The P waves have 
the classic ‘sawtooth’ appearance. Alternate P waves are merged with the QRS complex. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   131

_OHCM_10e.indb   131

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
132

Pacemakers

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

In normal circumstances the SAN plays the role of pacemaker. On occasion, other 
areas of myocardium will set the pace (see earlier in chapter). If the heart is not 
pacing itself fast enough, artiﬁ cial pacing may be required. Options include ‘percus-
sion pacing’—ﬁ st strikes to the precordium, used only in periarrest situations; trans-
cutaneous  pacing—electrical  stimulation  via  deﬁ brillator  pads  (p770);  temporary 
transvenous pacing (p776); and a subcutaneously implanted permanent pacemaker.
Indications for temporary cardiac pacing include
  • Symptomatic bradycardia, unresponsive to atropine.
  • After acute anterior MI, prophylactic pacing is required in:

  • complete AV block
  • Mobitz type I AV block (Wenckebach)
  • Mobitz type II AV block
  • non-adjacent bifascicular, or trifascicular block (p100).

  • After inferior MI, pacing may not be needed in complete AV block if reasonably 

stable, rate is >40–50, and QRS complexes are narrow.

  • Suppression of drug-resistant tachyarrhythmias by overdrive pacing, eg SVT, VT.
  • Special situations: during general anaesthesia; during cardiac surgery; during elec-

trophysiological studies; drug overdose (eg digoxin, -blockers, verapamil).

See p776 for further details and insertion technique.
Indications for a permanent pacemaker (PPM) include
  • Complete AV block (Stokes–Adams attacks, asymptomatic, congenital).
  • Mobitz type II AV block (p99).
  • Persistent AV block after anterior MI.
  • Symptomatic bradycardias (eg sick sinus syndrome, p125).
  • Heart failure (cardiac resynchronization therapy).
  • Drug-resistant tachyarrhythmias.
Pre-operative assessment Bloods (FBC, clotting screen, renal function), IV cannula, 
consent, antibiotics as per local protocol.
Post-operative management Prior to discharge, check wound for bleeding or hae-
matoma; check lead positions and for pneumothorax on CXR; check pacemaker func-
tion. During 1st week, inspect for wound haematoma or dehiscence. Other problems: 
lead fracture or dislodgement; pacemaker interference (eg from patient’s muscles); 
infected device. The battery needs changing every 5–10 years. For driving rules see 
p158.
Pacemaker letter codes These enable pacemaker identiﬁ cation (min is 3 letters):
  • 1st letter the chamber paced (A=atria, V=ventricles, D=dual chamber).
  • 2nd letter the chamber sensed (A=atria, V=ventricles, D=dual chamber, O=none).
  • 3rd letter the pacemaker response (T=triggered, I=inhibited, D=dual).
  • 4th letter (R=rate modulation, P=programmable, M=multiprogrammable).
  • 5th  letter  (P  means  that  in  tachy cardia  the  pacemaker  will  pace  the  patient. 
S means that in tachycardia the pace maker shocks the patient. D=dual ability to 
pace and shock. O=neither of these).

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) Improves the synchronization of cardi-
ac contraction and reduces mortality31 in people with symptomatic heart failure who 
have an ejection fraction <35% and a QRS duration >120ms.32 It involves biventricular 
pacing (both septal and lateral walls of the LV) and, if required, also an atrial lead. It 
may be combined with a deﬁ brillator (CRT-D).
ECG of paced rhythms (ﬁ g 3.13 and ﬁ g 3.36). Pacemaker input appears as a vertical 
‘spike’ on the ECG. This spike can be very small with modern bipolar pacing systems. 
Ventricular pacing usually has a broad QRS morphology (similar to LBBB). Systems are 
usually programmed ‘on demand’ so will only pace when necessary. Modern systems 
are generally very reliable but pacing spikes with no capture afterwards suggests 
a problem. Programming of devices is complicated so seek help early if concerned. 
Many pacemakers store intracardiac electrograms which can be accessed to cor-
relate rhythm with any symptoms.

_OHCM_10e.indb   132

_OHCM_10e.indb   132

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
133

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.36  ECG of a paced rhythm.

Some pacemaker terms
Fusion beat: Union of native depolarization and pacemaker impulse.
Pseudofusion beat: The pacemaker impulse occurs just after cardiac depolariza-
tion, so it is ineff ective, but it distorts the QRS morphology.
Pseudopseudofusion beat: If a DVI pacemaker gives an atrial spike within a na-
tive QRS complex, the atrial output is non-contributory.
Pacemaker syndrome: In single-chamber pacing, retrograde conduction to the 
atria, which then contract during ventricular systole. This leads to retrograde ﬂ ow 
in pulmonary veins, and cardiac output, dyspnoea, palpitations, malaise, and even 
syncope.
Pacemaker-mediated  tachycardia:  Retrograde  conduction  to  the  atrium  is 
sensed by the pacemaker and ventricular pacing delivered in response. This again 
causes retrograde atrial conduction causing a repetitive sensing/pacing loop. This 
can be ﬁ xed by changing pacing programming parameters.

Congenital arrhythmogenic cardiac conditions
As  well  as  the  many  acquired  conditions  that  can  predispose  to  arrhythmias 
(p125), there are a number of congenital conditions. These may be clinically silent 
until a fatal attack and are likely to be responsible for most cases of sudden adult 
death syndrome (SADS). They include:
WPW syndrome (Wolff -Parkinson-White; ﬁ g 3.37.) Caused by congenital acces-
sory conduction pathway between atria and ventricles. Resting ECG shows short 
PR interval, wide QRS complex (due to slurred upstroke or ‘delta wave’) and ST-T 
changes. Two types: WPW type A (+ve  wave in V1), WPW type B (Ωve  wave in V1). 
Tachycardia can be due to an AVRT or pre-excited AF/atrial ﬂ utter (p130). Manage-
ment may include ablation of the accessory pathway.
LQTS  (Long  QT  syndromes.)  These  are  channelopathies  that  result  in  prolonged 
repolarization phases, predisposing the patient to ventricular arrhythmias; classi-
cally torsades de pointes. p804. Conditions associated with LQTS include Jervell 
and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (p702) and Romano–Ward syndrome (p710).
ARVC (Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.) RV myocardium is re-
placed with ﬁ bro-fatty material. Symptoms: palpitations and syncope during ex-
ercise. ECG changes include epsilon wave; T inversion and broad QRS in V1–V3.
Brugada Sodium channelopathy. Diagnosis: classic coved ST elevation in V1–V3 plus 
suggestive clinical history. ECG changes and arrhythmias can be precipitated by 
fever, medications (www.brugadadrugs.org), electrolyte imbalances, and ischaemia.
Many of these patients can be treated medically or conservatively but those at 
high risk may require an implantable cardiac deﬁ brillator (ICD). Screening family 
members is important for picking up undiagnosed cases.

Fig 3.37  This patient has Wolff -Parkinson-White syndrome as they have delta waves (slurred QRS 
upstrokes) in beats 1 and 4 of this rhythm strip. The delta wave both broadens the ventricular 
complex and shortens the PR interval. If a patient with WPW has AF, avoid AV node blockers such as 
diltiazem, verapamil, and digoxin—but ﬂ ecainide may be used. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   133

_OHCM_10e.indb   133

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
134

Heart failure—basic concepts

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Deﬁ nition Cardiac output is inadequate for the body’s requirements.33
Prevalence 1–3% of the general population; ~10% among elderly patients. 34
Key classiﬁ cations
Systolic failure: Inability of the ventricle to contract normally, resulting in cardiac 
output. Ejection fraction (EF) is <40%. Causes: IHD, MI, cardiomyopathy. 
Diastolic failure: Inability of the ventricle to relax and ﬁ ll normally, causing ﬁ lling 
pressures. Typically EF is >50%, this is termed HFpEF (heart failure with preserved 
EF). Causes: ventricular hypertrophy, constrictive pericarditis, tamponade, restric-
tive cardio myopathy, obesity. NB: systolic and diastolic failure pathophysiology often 
coexists.
Left  ventricular  failure  (LVF):  Symptoms:  dyspnoea,  poor  exercise  tolerance,  fa-
tigue, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (PND), nocturnal cough (± pink 
frothy sputum), wheeze (cardiac ‘asthma’), nocturia, cold peripheries, weight loss.
Right ventricular failure (RVF): Causes: LVF, pulmonary stenosis, lung disease (cor 
pulmonale, see p194). Symptoms: peripheral oedema (up to thighs, sacrum, abdomi-
nal wall), ascites, nausea, anorexia, facial engorge ment, epistaxis.
LVF and RVF may occur independently, or together as congestive cardiac failure (CCF).
Acute heart failure: Often used exclusively to mean new-onset acute or decom-
pensation  of  chronic  heart  failure  characterized  by  pulmonary  and/or  peripheral 
oedema with or without signs of peripheral hypo perfusion. Chronic heart failure: 
Develops or progresses slowly. Venous congestion is common but arterial pressure 
is well maintained until very late.
Low-output heart failure: Cardiac output is  and fails to  normally with exertion. 
Causes:
  • Excessive preload: eg mitral regurgitation or ﬂ uid overload (eg renal failure or too 

rapid IV infusions, particularly in the elderly and those with established HF).

  • Pump failure: systolic and/or diastolic HF (see above), heart rate (eg -blockers, 
heart block, post MI), negatively inotropic drugs (eg most antiarrhythmic agents).

  • Chronic excessive afterload: eg aortic stenosis, hypertension.
Excessive preload can cause ventricular dilatation, this exacerbates pump failure. 
Excessive afterload prompts ventricular muscle thickening (ventricular hypertro-
phy), resulting in stiff  walls and diastolic dysfunction.
High-output heart failure: This is rare. Here, output is normal or increased in the 
face of needs. Failure occurs when cardiac output fails to meet these needs. It will 
occur with a normal heart, but even earlier if there is heart disease. Causes: anaemia, 
pregnancy, hyperthyroidism, Paget’s disease, arteriovenous malformation, beriberi. 
Consequences: initially features of RVF; later LVF becomes evident.
Diagnosis Requires symptoms of failure (see above) and objective evidence of car-
diac dysfunction at rest. For CCF, use the Framingham criteria. 35
Signs As described previously plus cyanosis, BP, narrow pulse pressure, pulsus al-
ternans, displaced apex (LV dilatation), RV heave (pulmonary hypertension), signs of 
valve diseases. Severity can be graded using the New York classiﬁ cation (see BOX). 
Investigations According to NICE, 33 if ECG and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP; p137) 
are normal, heart failure is unlikely, and an alternative diagnosis should be consid-
ered; if either is abnormal, then echocardiography (p110) is required.
Tests  FBC; U&E;  BNP;  CXR (see ﬁ g 3.38); ECG;  echo.  ECG may indicate cause (look for 
evidence of ischaemia, MI, or ventricular hypertrophy). It is rare to get a completely 
normal ECG in chronic heart failure. Echocardiography is the key investigation. 36 It 
may indicate the cause (MI, valvular heart disease) and can conﬁ rm the presence or 
absence of LV dysfunction. Endomyocardial biopsy is rarely needed.
Prognosis Poor with ~25–50% of patients dying within 5yrs of diagnosis. If admis-
sion is needed, 5yr mortality ≈75%. Be realistic: in one study, 54% of those dying in 
the next 72h had been expected to live for >6months.37

_OHCM_10e.indb   134

_OHCM_10e.indb   134

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
135

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

New York classiﬁ cation of heart failure

I      Heart disease present, but no undue dyspnoea from ordinary activity.
II      Comfortable at rest; dyspnoea during ordinary activities.
III      Less than ordinary activity causes dyspnoea, which is limiting.
IV      Dyspnoea present at rest; all activity causes discomfort.

(a)

(b)

Fig 3.38  (a) The CXR in left ventricular failure. These features can be remembered as A B C D E. 
Alveolar oedema, classically this is perihilar ‘bat’s wing’ shadowing. Kerley B lines—now known 
as septal lines. These are variously attributed to interstitial oedema and engorged peripheral lym-
phatics. Cardiomegaly—cardiothoracic ratio >50% on a PA ﬁ lm. Dilated prominent upper lobe veins 
(upper lobe diversion). Pleural Eff usions. Other features include peribronchial cuffi  ng (thickened 
bronchial walls) and ﬂ uid in the ﬁ ssures. (b) ‘Bat’s wing’, peri-hilar pulmonary oedema indicating 
heart failure and ﬂ uid overload.

_OHCM_10e.indb   135

_OHCM_10e.indb   135

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
136

Heart failure—management

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Acute heart failure This is a medical emergency (p800).
Chronic heart failure Stop smoking. Stop drinking alcohol. Eat less salt. Optimize 
weight &  nutrition.33
  • Treat the cause (eg if dysrhythmias; valve disease).
  • Treat exacerbating factors (anaemia, thyroid disease, infection, BP).
  • Avoid exacerbating factors, eg NSAIDS (ﬂ uid retention) and verapamil (Ωve inotrope).
  • Annual ’ﬂ u vaccine, one-off  pneumococcal vaccine.
  • Drugs:

1      Diuretics: Give loop diuretics to relieve symptoms, eg furosemide 40mg/24h 
PO or bumetanide 1–2mg/24h PO. Increase dose as necessary. SE: K+, renal im-
pairment. Monitor  U&E and add K+-sparing diuretic (eg spironolactone) if K+ 
<3.2mmol/L, predisposition to arrhythmias, concurrent digoxin therapy, or pre-
existing K+-losing conditions. If refractory oedema, consider adding a thiazide, 
eg metolazone 5–20mg/24h PO. Diuretics improve symptoms but studies show-
ing mortality beneﬁ t are lacking.

2      ACE-i:  Consider  in  all  those  with  left  ventricular  systolic  dysfunction  (LVSD); 
improves symptoms and prolongs life (see p114–5). If cough is a problem, an 
angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) may be substituted. SE: K+.

3      -blockers:  (eg  carvedilol)  mortality  in  heart  failure—beneﬁ t  additional  to 
those of ACE-i in patients with systolic dysfunction. 38 Use with caution: ‘start 
low and go slow’; if in doubt seek specialist advice ﬁ rst; wait ≥2weeks between 
each dose increment. -blocker therapy in patients hospitalized with decom-
pensated heart failure is associated with lower post-discharge mortality risk 
and improved treatment rates. 39

4      Mineralocorticoid  receptor  antagonists:  Spironolactone  (25mg/24h  PO) 
mortality  by  30%  when  added  to  conventional  therapy. 40  Use  in  those  still 
symptomatic despite optimal therapy as listed previously, and in post-MI pa-
tients with LVSD. Spironolactone is K+-sparing, but there is little risk of signiﬁ -
cant hyperkalaemia, even when given with ACE-i. Nevertheless, U&E should be 
monitored, particularly if the patient has known CKD. Eplerenone is an alterna-
tive if spironolactone is not tolerated.

5      Digoxin: Helps symptoms even in those with sinus rhythm, and should be con-
sidered for patients with  LVSD who have signs or symptoms of heart failure 
while receiving standard therapy, including ACE-i and -blockers, or in patients 
with AF. Dose example: 125mcg/24h PO if sinus rhythm. Monitor U&E; maintain K+ 
at 4–5mmol/L as K+ risks digoxin toxicity, and vice versa. Digoxin levels: p756. 
Other inotropes are unhelpful in terms of outcome.

6      Vasodilators:  The  combination  of  hydralazine  (SE:  drug-induced  lupus)  and 
isosorbide dinitrate should be used if intolerant of ACE-i and ARBS as it reduces 
mortality. It also reduces mortality when added to standard therapy (including 
ACE-i) in black patients with heart failure. 41

Intractable heart failure Reassess the cause. Are they taking the drugs?—at maxi-
mum dose? Switching furosemide to bumetanide (one 5mg tab≈200mg furos emide) 
might help. Inpatient management may include:
  • Minimal exertion; Na+ & ﬂ uid restriction (1.5L/24h PO). 
  • Metolazone (as above) and IV furosemide (p800).
  • Opiates and IV nitrates may relieve symptoms (p800).
  • Weigh daily. Do frequent U&E (beware K+).
  • Give DVT prophylaxis: heparin + TED stockings (p578).
In extremis: Try IV inotropes (p802; it may be diffi  cult to wean patients off  them).
Consider:  Cardiac  resynchronization  (p132),  LV  assist  device  (BOX  ‘Pulseless  pa-
tients’), or transplantation.
Palliative  care  Treat/prevent  comorbidities  (eg  ’ﬂ u  vaccination).  Good  nutrition 
(allow alcohol!). Involve GP: continuity of care and discussion of prognosis is much 
apprec i ated. 42 Dyspnoea, pain (from liver capsule stretching), nausea, constipation, 
and mood all need tackling. 43 Opiates improve pain and dyspnoea. O2 may help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   136

_OHCM_10e.indb   136

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
137

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Pulseless patients
Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are increasingly used as bridging therapies 
for patients awaiting heart transplantation (ﬁ g 3.39). An internalized pump forces 
blood through tubing from the left ventricle to the aorta. To power the pump, the 
patient attaches the device to the mains electricity, and uses batteries when out 
and about. Patients with continuous (rather than pulsatile) ﬂ ow LVADs have no 
pulse (ﬁ g 3.39c) and ascultation will reveal a loud, continuous, mechanical hum. If 
the patient collapses and there is no hum, resuscitation should include checking 
the LVAD power supply!

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig 3.39  (a) CXR of a patient with a continuous ﬂ ow LVAD. Blood is taken from the LV apex and 
pumped into the aorta. (b) Retinal ﬂ ow velocity trace from a normal subject—large peaks in ﬂ ow 
rate during systole. (c) Retinal ﬂ ow velocity trace from a patient with an LVAD. The ﬂ ow rate only 
slightly rises during systole as the ﬂ ow from the LVAD is continuous.
Image in a) reproduced from Gardener et al., Heart Failure, 2014, with permission from Oxford University 
Press. (b) and (c) courtesy of Barry McDonnell.

Natriuretic peptides
Secretory granules have long been known to exist in the atria, and if hom ogenized 
atrial tissue is injected into rats, their urine volume (and Na+ excretion) rises; this 
is because of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). BNP is a similar hormone originally 
identiﬁ ed from pig brain (hence the B), but most BNP is secreted from ventricular 
myocardium. Plasma BNP is closely related to LV pressure and in MI and LV dys-
function, these hormones can be released in large quantities. Secretion is also 
increased by tachycardia, glucocorticoids, and thyroid hormones.
Role: ANP and BNP assist the stretched atria and ventricles by increasing GFR and 
decreasing  renal  Na+  resorption,  thereby  reducing  ﬂ uid  load;  and  by  relaxing 
smooth muscle, thereby decreasing preload.
BNP as a biomarker of heart failure: BNP distinguishes heart failure from other 
causes of dyspnoea more accurately than other biomarkers and LV ejection frac-
tion (sensitivity: >90%; speciﬁ city: 80–90%). The rises are greater with left than 
right heart failure and with systolic than diastolic dysfunction.
What  BNP  threshold  for  diagnosing  heart  failure: If  BNP >100ng/L, this ‘diag-
noses’ heart failure better than other clinical variables or clinical judgement (his-
tory, examination, and CXR). BNP can be used to ‘rule out’ heart failure if <50ng/L. A 
BNP >50ng/L does not exclude other coexisting diseases; conditions that can cause 
BNP rises include tachycardia, cardiac ischaemia, COPD, PE, renal disease, sepsis, he-
patic cirrhosis, diabetes, and old age. Also, assays vary, so liaise with your lab.
Prognosis in heart failure: The higher the BNP, the higher the cardiovascular and 
all-cause mortality (independent of age, NYHA class, previous MI, and LV ejection 
fraction) and the greater the risk of sudden death. So, a patient whose symptoms 
are currently well controlled may beneﬁ t from more aggressive treatment if their 
BNP if persistently raised.

_OHCM_10e.indb   137

_OHCM_10e.indb   137

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
138

Hypertension

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Hypertension 44 is the most important risk factor for premature death and CVD; caus-
ing ~50% of all vascular deaths (8≈106/yr). Usually asymptomatic, so regular screen-
ing (eg 3-yrly) is a vital task—most preventable deaths are in areas without universal 
screening. 45
Deﬁ ning hypertension BP has a skewed normal distribution (p751) within the popu-
lation, and risk is continuously related to BP, so it is imp ossible to deﬁ ne ‘hyperten-
sion’. 46 We choose to select a value above which risk is signiﬁ cantly increased and 
the beneﬁ t of treatment is clear cut, see below. Don’t rely on a single reading—assess 
over a period of time (how long depends on the BP and the presence of other risk 
factors or end-organ damage). Conﬁ rm with 24hr ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM); 
or a week of home readings. NB: the diagnostic threshold is lower ~135/85mmHg.
Whom  to  treat  All  with  BP  ≥160/100mmHg  (or  ABPM  ≥150/95mmHg).  For  those 
≥140/90, the decision depends on the risk of coronary events, presence of diabetes, 
or end-organ damage; see ﬁ g 3.40. 44 The HYVET study showed that there is even sub-
stantial beneﬁ t in treating the over-80s. 47 Lower thresholds may be appropriate for 
young people—BP is on average lower in young people (eg 100–110/60–70 in 18-year-
olds) and they have a ‘lifetime’ of risk ahead of them; but evidence to treat is lacking.
White-coat hypertension Refers to an elevated clinic pressure, but normal ABPM 
(day average <135/85). NICE says don’t treat; but more likely to develop hypertension 
in future, and may have risk of CVD. Masked hypertension is the opposite.
‘Malignant’ or accelerated phase hypertension: A rapid rise in BP leading to vas-
cular damage (pathological hallmark is ﬁ brinoid necrosis). Usually there is severe 
hypertension (eg systolic >200, diastolic>130mmHg) + bilateral retinal haemorrhages 
and exudates; papilloedema may or may not be present. Symptoms are common, 
eg headache ± visual disturbance. It requires urgent treatment, and may also pre-
cipitate acute kidney injury, heart failure, or encephalopathy, which are hypertensive 
emergencies. Untreated, 90% die in 1yr; treated, 70% survive 5yrs. It is more com-
mon in younger and in black subjects. Look hard for any underlying cause.
Primary or ‘essential’ hypertension: (Cause unknown.) ~95% of cases.
Secondary hypertension: ~5% of cases. Causes include:
  • Renal disease: the most common secondary cause. 75% are from intrinsic renal 
disease: glomerulonephritis, polyarteritis nodosa (PAN), systemic sclerosis, chronic 
pyelonephritis, or polycystic kidneys. 25% are due to renovascular disease, most 
frequently atheromatous (elderly  cigarette smokers, eg with peripheral vascular 
disease) or rarely ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia (young ).

  • Endocrine disease: Cushing’s (p224) and Conn’s syndromes (p228), phaeochromo-

cytoma (p228), acromegaly, hyperparathyroidism.

  • Others: coarctation (p156), pregnancy (OHCS p48), liquorice, drugs: steroids, MAOI, 

oral contraceptive pill, cocaine, amphetamines.

Signs and symptoms Usually asymptomatic (except malignant hypertension, see 
earlier in topic). Headache is no more common than in the general population. Al-
ways examine the CVS fully and check for retinopathy. Are there features of an un-
derlying cause (phaeochromocytoma, p228, etc.), signs of renal disease, radiofemoral 
delay, or weak femoral pulses (coarctation), renal bruits, palpable kidneys, or Cush-
ing’s syndrome? Look for end-organ damage: LVH, retinopathy and proteinuria—indi-
cates severity and duration of hypertension and associated with a poorer prognosis.
Tests To conﬁ rm diagnosis: ABPM or home BP monitoring. To help quantify overall 
risk: Fasting glucose; cholesterol. To look for end-organ damage: ECG or echo (any 
LV hypertrophy? past MI?); urine analysis (protein, blood). To ‘exclude’ secondary 
causes:  U&E (eg K+ in Conn’s); Ca2+ ( in hyperparathyroidism). Special tests: Re-
nal ultrasound/arteriography (renal artery stenosis); 24h urinary meta-adrenaline 
(p228); urinary free cortisol (p225); renin; aldosterone; MR aorta (coarctation).

_OHCM_10e.indb   138

_OHCM_10e.indb   138

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
139

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Grading hypertensive retinopathy

1      Tortuous arteries with thick shiny walls (silver or copper wiring, p560, ﬁ g 12.18).
2      AV nipping (narrowing where arteries cross veins, p560, ﬁ g 12.19).
3      Flame haemorrhages and cotton-wool spots.
4      Papilloedema, p560, ﬁ g 12.20.

Measuring BP with a sphygmomanometer

  • Use the correct size cuff . The cuff  width should be >40% of the arm circum-
ference. The bladder should be centred over the brachial artery, and the cuff  
applied snugly. Support the arm in a horizontal position at mid-sternal level.

  • Inﬂ ate the cuff  while palpating the brachial artery, until the pulse disappears. 

This provides an estimate of systolic pressure.

  • Inﬂ ate the cuff  until 30mmHg above systolic pressure, then place stethoscope 

over the brachial artery. Deﬂ ate the cuff  at 2mmHg/s.

  • Systolic pressure: appearance of sustained repetitive tapping sounds (Korotkoff  I).
  • Diastolic pressure: usually the disappearance of sounds (Korotkoff  V). However, 
in some individuals (eg pregnant women) sounds are present until the zero point. 
In this case, the muffl  ing of sounds, Korotkoff  IV, should be used. State which is 
used for a given reading. For children, see OHCS p157.

  • For advice on using automated sphygmomanometers and a list of validated de-

vices see http://www.bhsoc.org/latest-guidelines/how-to-measure-blood-pressure/

Managing suspected hypertension

Clinic blood pressure 
<140/90mmHg
Normotensive

Clinic blood pressure 
≥140/90mmHg

Clinic blood pressure 
≥180/110mmHg

Consider starting 
antihypertensive 
drug  immediately. 
Consider referral. 

Off er ABPM.
Calculate cv risk and look for organ damage. 

ABPM <135/85mmHg
Normotensive
NICE says no . 
Consider  if clear 
end-organ damage or 
high risk. 

ABPM ≥135/85mmHg
 if cv risk >20%/10yrs 
or end organ damage

ABPM ≥150/95mmHg


Fig 3.40  Managing suspected hypertension.
Target pressure is <140/90mmHg (150/90 if aged >80), but in diabetes mellitus aim for <130/80mmHg, and 
<125/75 if proteinuria.  To quantify CV risk, see www.bhsoc.org. NB: CV threshold of 20% ≈ 15% for CHD alone. 
Examples  of  target  (end-organ)  damage:  • LVH •     PMH of  MI or  angina • PMH of stroke/TIA • Peripheral 
vascular disease • Renal failure.

Data source NICE CG127, https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg127/resources/hypertension-in-adults-
diagnosis-and-management-35109454941637. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   139

_OHCM_10e.indb   139

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
140

Hypertension—management 

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Look for and treat underlying causes  (eg renal disease, alcohol: see p138). Drug 
therapy reduces the risk of CVD and death. Almost any adult over 50 would beneﬁ t 
from antihypertensives, whatever their starting BP. 48 Treatment is especially impor-
tant if: BP is persistently ≥160/100mmHg or cardio vascular risk  (10yr risk of vascular 
disease ≥20%), or existing vascular disease or target organ damage (eg brain, kidney, 
heart, retina) with BP >140/90mmHg. Essential hypertension is not ‘curable’ and long-
term treatment is needed.
Treatment goal <140/90mmHg (<130/80 in diabetes, 150/90 if aged >80). Reduce 
blood pressure slowly; rapid reduction can be fatal, especially in the context of an 
acute stroke. These may fall—SPRINT49 showed a target of 120/80 was beneﬁ cial.
Lifestyle changes Concomitant risk factors: stop smoking; low-fat diet. Reduce 
alcohol and salt intake; increase exercise; reduce weight if obese.
Drugs The ALLHAT study suggests that adequate BP reduction is more important than 
the speciﬁ c drug used. 50 However, -blockers seem to be less eff ective than other 
drugs at reducing major cardiovascular events, particularly stroke. -blockers and 
thiazides may increase the risk of new-onset diabetes, Ca2+-channel blockers appear 
neutral, and ACE-i or ARB may reduce the risk. 44
Monotherapy: If ≥55yrs, and in black patients of any age, 1st choice is a Ca2+-channel 
antagonist or thiazide. If <55, 1st choice is ACE-i (or ARB if ACE-i intolerant, eg cough). 
-blockers are not 1st line for hypertension, but consider in younger people, particu-
larly if: intolerance or contraindication to ACE-i/ARB, she is a woman of child-bearing 
potential, or there is sympathetic drive.
Combination : ACE-i + Ca2+-channel antagonist or diuretic is logical, and has been 
commonly used in trials. There is little evidence on using 3 drugs but current recom-
mendation is  ACE-i, Ca2+-channel antagonist, and thiazide.44 If  BP still uncontrolled 
on adequate doses of 3 drugs, add a 4th—consider: spironolactone 25–50mg/24h or 
higher-dose thiazide, but monitor U&E. Alternatively, -blocker, or selective -blocker 
and get help. Check compliance (urinary drug screen, or observed ).
Drug  examples  Thiazides:  Eg  chlortalidone  25–50mg/24h  PO mané.  SE:  K+,  Na+, 
impotence. CI: gout. Ca2+-channel antagonists: Eg nifedipine MR, 30–60mg/24h PO. 
SE: ﬂ ushes, fatigue, gum hyperplasia, ankle oedema; avoid short-acting form. ACE-i: 
Eg lisinopril 10–40mg/24h PO (max 40mg/d). ACE-i may be 1st choice if co-existing LVF, 
or in diabetics (esp. if microalbuminuria, p314) or proteinuria. SE: cough, K+, renal 
failure, angio-oedema.  CI: bilateral renal artery or aortic valve stenosis; p114.  ARB: 
Candesartan (8–32mg/d); caution if valve disease or cardiomyopathy; monitor K+. 
SE:  vertigo,  urticaria,  pruritus.  Useful  if  ACE-i  induces  cough.  -blockers:  Eg  biso-
prolol 2.5–5mg/24h  PO.  SE: bronchospasm, heart failure, cold peripheries, lethargy, 
impotence. CI: asthma; caution in heart failure. Consider aspirin when BP controlled, 
if aged >55yrs. Add a statin if cholesterol raised. Most drugs take 4–8wks to gain 
maximum eff ect: don’t assess effi  cacy with just one BP measurement.
Malignant  hypertension  (ﬁ g  3.41)  In  general,  use  oral  therapy,  unless  there  is 
encephal opathy or CCF. The aim is for a controlled reduction in  BP over days, not 
hours. Avoid sudden drops in  BP as cerebral autoregulation is poor (stroke risk). 
Bed rest; there is no ideal hypotensive, but atenolol or long-acting Ca2+ blockers may 
be used PO.
Encephalopathy:  (Headache,  focal  CNS  signs,  seizures,  coma.)  Aim  to  reduce  BP 
to ~110mmHg diastolic over 4h. Admit to monitored area. Insert intra-arterial line 
for pressure monitoring. Either IV labetalol (eg 50mg IV over 1min, repeated every 
5min, max 200mg) or sodium nitroprusside infusion (0.5mcg/kg/min IVI titrated up 
to 8mcg/kg/min, eg 50mg in 1L glucose 5%; expect to give 100–200mL/h for a few 
hours only, to avoid cyanide risk).
Never use sublingual nifedipine to reduce BP (rapid drop in BP may cause stroke ). 51

_OHCM_10e.indb   140

_OHCM_10e.indb   140

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

4

4

1

1

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.41  Left ventricular hypertrophy—this is from a patient with malignant hypertension—note the sum of the S-wave in V2 and R-wave in V6 is greater than 35mm.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
4
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142

Rheumatic fever (RF)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

This systemic infection is still common in developing countries but increasingly rare 
in the West. Peak incidence: 5–15yrs. Tends to recur unless prevented. Pharyngeal 
infection with Lanceﬁ eld group A -haemolytic streptococci triggers rheumatic fe-
ver 2–4wks later, in the susceptible 2% of the population. An antibody to the car-
bohydrate cell wall of the streptococcus cross-reacts with valve tissue (antigenic 
mimicry) and may cause permanent damage to the heart valves.
Diagnosis Use the revised Jones criteria (may be over-rigorous). There must be 
evidence of recent strep infection plus 2 major criteria, or 1 major + 2 minor.
Evidence of group A -haemolytic streptococcal infection:
  • Positive throat culture (usually negative by the time RF symptoms appear).
  • Rapid streptococcal antigen test +ve.
  • Elevated  or  rising  streptococcal  antibody  titre  (eg  anti-streptolysin  O  (ASO)  or 

DNase B titre).

  • Recent scarlet fever.
Major criteria:
  • Carditis:  tachycardia,  murmurs  (mitral  or  aortic  regurgitation,  Carey  Coombs’ 
murmur, p46), pericardial rub, CCF, cardiomegaly, conduction defects (45–70%). An 
apical systolic murmur may be the only sign.52

  • Arthritis: a migratory, ‘ﬂ itting’ polyarthritis; usually aff ects larger joints (75%).
  • Subcutaneous  nodules:  small,  mobile,  painless  nodules  on  extensor  surfaces  of 

joints and spine (2–20%).

  • Erythema marginatum: (ﬁ g 3.42) geographical-type rash with red, raised edges 

and clear centre; occurs mainly on trunk, thighs and arms in 2–10% (p562).

  • Sydenham’s chorea (St Vitus’ dance): occurs late in 10%. Unilateral or bilateral 
involuntary semi-purposeful movements. May be preceded by emotional lability 
and uncharacteristic behaviour. 

Minor criteria:
  • Fever.
  • Raised ESR or CRP.
  • Arthralgia (but not if arthritis is one of the major criteria).
  • Prolonged PR interval (but not if carditis is major criterion).
  • Previous rheumatic fever.
Management
  • Bed rest until CRP normal for 2wks (may be 3 months).
  • Benzylpenicillin 0.6–1.2g IV stat, then phenoxymethylpenicillin 250–500mg 4 times daily 
PO for 10 days (if allergic to penicillin, give erythromycin or azithromycin for 10 days). 
  • Analgesia for carditis/arthritis: aspirin 100mg/kg/d PO in divided doses (max 4–8g/d) 
for 2d, then 70mg/kg/d for 6wks. Monitor salicylate level. Toxicity causes tinnitus, 
hyperventilation, and metabolic acidosis. Risk of Reye syndrome in children. Alterna-
tive: NSAIDS (p546). If moderate-to-severe carditis is present (cardiomegaly,  CCF, or 
3rd-degree heart block), add oral prednisolone to salicylate therapy. In case of heart 
failure, treat appropriately (p136), with severe valve disease, surgery may be required.

  • Immobilize joints in severe arthritis.
  • Haloperidol (0.5mg/8h PO) or diazepam for the chorea.
Prognosis  60%  with  carditis  develop  chronic  rheumatic  heart  disease.  This  cor-
relates with the severity of the carditis. 53 Acute attacks last an average of 3 months. 
Recurrence may be precipitated by further streptococcal infections, pregnancy, or 
use of the oral contraceptive pill. Cardiac sequelae aff ect mitral (70%), aortic (40%), 
tricuspid (10%), and pulmonary (2%) valves. Incompetent lesions develop during the 
attack, stenoses years later.
Secondary prophylaxis Penicillin V 250mg/12h PO. Alternatives: sulfadiazine 1g dai-
ly (0.5g if <30kg) or erythromycin 250mg twice daily (if penicillin allergic). Duration: 
If carditis+persistent valvular disease, continue at least until age of 40 (sometimes 
lifelong). If carditis but no valvular disease, continue for 10yrs. If there is no carditis, 
5yrs of prophylaxis (until age of 21) is suffi  cient.

_OHCM_10e.indb   142

_OHCM_10e.indb   142

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
143

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.42  Erythema marginatum.

Image courtesy of Dr Maria Angelica Binotto.

_OHCM_10e.indb   143

_OHCM_10e.indb   143

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
144

Mitral valve disease

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Mitral regurgitation (MR) Backﬂ ow through the mitral valve during systole.
Causes:  Functional  (LV  dilatation);  annular  calciﬁ cation  (elderly);  rheumatic  fever; 
infective  endocarditis;  mitral  valve  prolapse;  ruptured  chordae  tendinae;  papillary 
muscle dysfunction/rupture (eg post-MI); connective tissue disorders (Ehlers–Danlos, 
Marfan’s); cardiomyopathy; congenital (may be associated with other defects, eg ASD, 
AV canal); appetite suppressants (eg fenﬂ uramine, phentermine).
Symptoms: Dyspnoea; fatigue; palpitations; symptoms of causative factor (eg fever). 
Signs: AF; displaced, hyperdynamic apex; pansystolic murmur at apex radiating to 
axilla; soft S1; split S2; loud P2 (pulmonary hypertension). Severity: the more severe, 
the larger the left ventricle.
Tests: ECG: AF; P-mitrale if in sinus rhythm (may mean left atrial size); LVH. CXR: big LA 
& LV; mitral valve calciﬁ cation; pulmonary oedema.
Echocardiogram: To assess LV function and MR severity and aetiology (transoesoph-
ageal to assess severity and suitability for repair rather than replacement). Cardiac 
catheterization to conﬁ rm diagnosis, exclude other valve disease, and assess coro-
nary artery disease (can combine CABG with valve surgery).
Management: Control rate if fast AF. Anticoagulate if: AF; history of embolism; pros-
thetic valve; additional mitral stenosis. Diuretics improve symptoms. Surgery4 for 
deteriorating symptoms; aim to repair or replace the valve before LV is irreversibly 
impaired.
Mitral valve prolapse: Is the most common valvular abnormality (prevalence: ~5%). 
Occurs alone or with: ASD, patent ductus arteriosus, cardiomyopathy, Turner’s syn-
drome,  Marfan’s  syndrome,  osteogenesis  imperfecta,  pseudoxanthoma  elasticum, 
WPW (p133). Symptoms: Usually asymptomatic. May develop atypical chest pain, 
palpitations, and autonomic dysfunction symptoms. Signs: Mid-systolic click and/
or a late systolic murmur. Complications:  MR, cerebral emboli, arrhythmias, sud-
den  death.  Tests:  Echo  is  diagnostic.  ECG  may  show  inferior  T-wave  inversion.  : 
-blockers may help palpit ations and chest pain. Surgery if severe MR.
Mitral  stenosis  Causes:  Rheumatic  fever,  congenital,  mucopolysaccharidoses, 
endo cardial ﬁ broelastosis, malignant carcinoid (p271; rare), prosthetic valve.
Presentation: Normal mitral valve oriﬁ ce area is ~4–6cm2. Symptoms usually be-
gin  when  the  oriﬁ ce  becomes  <2cm2.  Pulmonary  hypertension  causes  dyspnoea, 
haemoptysis, chronic bronchitis-like picture; pressure from large left atrium on local 
structures causes hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal nerve), dysphagia (oesophagus), 
bronchial obstruction; also fatigue, palpitations, chest pain, systemic emboli, infec-
tive endocarditis (rare).
Signs: Malar ﬂ ush on cheeks (due to cardiac output); low-volume pulse; AF common 
(due to enlarged LA); tapping, non-displaced, apex beat (palpable S1); RV heave. On 
auscultation: loud S1; opening snap (pliable valve); rumbling mid-diastolic murmur 
(heard best in expiration, with patient on left side). Graham Steell murmur (p46) may 
occur. Severity: the more severe the stenosis, the longer the diastolic murmur, and 
the closer the opening snap is to S2.
Tests: ECG: AF; P-mitrale; RVH; progressive RAD. CXR: left atrial enlargement (double 
shadow in right cardiac silhouette); pulmonary oedema; mitral valve calciﬁ cation. 
Echo is diagnostic. Signiﬁ cant stenosis exists if the valve oriﬁ ce is <1cm2/m2 body 
surface area. Indications for cardiac catheterization: previous valvotomy; signs of 
other valve disease; angina; severe pulmonary hypertension; calciﬁ ed mitral valve.
Management: If in AF, rate control (p130) is crucial; anticoagulate with warfarin 
(p350). Diuretics  preload and pulmonary venous congestion. If this fails to control 
symptoms, balloon valvuloplasty (if pliable, non-calciﬁ ed valve), open mitral valvot-
omy, or valve replacement.

4  In patients with severe symptoms for whom open surgery is too dangerous, consider transcatheter valve 
repair, eg with MitraClip®. This is only available in specialist centres.

_OHCM_10e.indb   144

_OHCM_10e.indb   144

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
145

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

What Becomes of the Broken Hearted?
‘For who loveth extreamely, and feeleth not that passion to dissolve his hearte?
Who rejoyceth, and proveth not his heart dilated?
Who is moyled with heavinesse, or plunged with payne,
and perceiveth not his heart to bee coarcted?
Whom inﬂ ameth ire, and hath not heart-burning?
By these experiences, wee prove in our hearts the working of Passions,
and by the noyse of their tumult, wee understand the woorke of their presence’
Thomas Wright, The Passions of the Minde in Generall, 1604
From Aztec priests raising beating human hearts to the Sun-God, to heart meta-
phors in song lyrics today, ideas of links between the heart and human psychoso-
cial self/soul/experience-of-being have pervaded the imaginative landscapes of 
cultures throughout time and place.
Some of these links relate to physiological changes associated with emotion-trig-
gered adrenaline surges—‘my heart raced’, for example, is a phrase we relate to 
both physically and emotionally. Other heart-phrases result from poetic extrapola-
tions of heart/self ideas and have no physiological explanation, eg ‘he wears his 
heart on his sleeve’.
Evidence is building that heart/self interactions exist beyond metaphor and symp-
tomatic ‘ﬂ ight-or-ﬁ ght’ responses. Aff ective disorders, certain personality types, 
and traumatic life-experiences increase the risk of cardiac disease, even when life-
style factors are controlled for.54–56 In ‘broken heart syndrome’ (Takotsubo cardio-
myopathy), ventricular contraction morphology changes in response to emotional 
or physical stress (ﬁ g 3.43). It mimics a myocardial infarction in terms of clinical 
history, ECG changes, and troponin rises, but the prognosis and management may 
be quite diff erent so accurate diagnosis is important.
As physicians, we often focus on explainable physical aspects of disease, but the 
physical and psychosocial are inconveniently related and both should be assessed 
to determine best management. Should an IHD suff erer be off ered CBT alongside 
their statins? Could a grieving patient’s ‘MI’ be Takotsubo cardiomyopathy? To an-
swer these questions we must look beyond ECGs and troponin, to the ‘heart-ache’ 
of the literary and philosophical kinds.

(a)

(b)

Fig 3.43  (a) Left ventriculogram of a heart in diastole. (b) The same patient’s heart in systole. 
The apex is ballooning whilst the base contracts, causing ineffi  cient pumping and a risk of rup-
ture. This pattern is classic of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   145

_OHCM_10e.indb   145

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
146

Aortic valve disease

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Aortic stenosis (AS) Causes: Senile calciﬁ cation is the commonest. 57 Others: con-
genital (bicuspid valve, Williams syndrome, p149), rheumatic heart disease.
Presentation: Think of AS in any elderly person with chest pain, exertional dysp-
noea, or syncope. The classic triad includes angina, syncope, and heart failure. Also: 
dyspnoea; dizziness; faints; systemic emboli if infective endocarditis; sudden death. 
Signs: Slow rising pulse with narrow pulse pressure (feel for diminished and delayed 
carotid upstroke—parvus  et  tardus); heaving, non-displaced apex beat;  LV heave; 
aortic thrill; ejection systolic murmur (heard at the base, left sternal edge and the 
aortic area, radiates to the carotids). S1 is usually normal. As stenosis worsens, A2 is 
increasingly delayed, giving ﬁ rst a single S2 and then reversed splitting. But this sign 
is rare. More common is a quiet A2. In severe AS, A2 may be inaudible (calciﬁ ed valve). 
There may be an ejection click (pliable valve) or an S4.
Tests:  ECG:  LVH with strain pattern;  P-mitrale;  LAD; poor  R-wave progression;  LBBB 
or complete AV block (calciﬁ ed ring). CXR: LVH; calciﬁ ed aortic valve (ﬁ g 3.44); post-
stenotic dilatation of ascending aorta. Echo: diagnostic (p110). Doppler  echo can 
estimate the gradient across valves: severe stenosis if peak gradient 40mmHg (but 
beware the poor left ventricle not able to generate gradient) and valve area <1cm2. 
If the aortic jet velocity is >4m/s (or is increasing by >0.3m/s per yr) risk of complica-
tions is increased. 57 Cardiac catheter can assess: valve gradient; LV function; coronary 
artery disease; risks: emboli generation.
Differential diagnosis: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM, p152); aortic sclerosis.
Management: If symptomatic, prognosis is poor without surgery: 2–3yr survival if 
angina/syncope; 1–2yr if cardiac failure. If moderate-to-severe and treated medi-
cally, mortality can be as high as 50% at 2yrs, therefore prompt valve replacement 
(p148) is usually recommended. In asymptomatic patients with severe AS and a dete-
riorating ECG, valve replacement is also recommended. If the patient is not medically 
ﬁ t for surgery, percutaneous valvuloplasty/replacement (TAVI = transcatheter aortic 
valve implantation) may be attempted (ﬁ g 3.45).
Aortic sclerosis Senile degeneration of the valve. There is an ejection systolic mur-
mur; but no carotid radiation, and normal pulse (character and volume) and S2.
Aortic  regurgitation  (AR)  Acute:  Infective  endocarditis,  ascending  aortic  dis-
section, chest trauma. Chronic: Congenital, connective tissue disorders (Marfan’s 
syndrome, Ehlers–Danlos), rheumatic fever, Takayasu arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
SLE, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, appetite suppressants (eg fenﬂ uramine, phenter-
mine), seronegative arthritides (ankylosing spondylitis, Reiter’s syndrome, psor iatic 
arthropathy), hyper tension, osteogenesis imperfecta, syphilitic aortitis.
Symptoms: Exertional dyspnoea, orthopnoea, and PND. Also: palpitations, angina, 
syncope, CCF. Signs: Collapsing (water-hammer) pulse (p42); wide pulse pressure; 
displaced, hyperdynamic apex beat; high-pit ched early diastolic murmur (heard best 
in expiration, with patient sat forward). Eponyms: Corrigan’s sign: carotid pulsation; 
de Musset’s sign: head nodding with each heart beat; Quincke’s sign: capillary pulsa-
tions in nail beds; Duroziez’s sign: in the groin, a ﬁ nger compressing the femoral ar-
tery 2cm proximal to the stethoscope gives a systolic murmur; if 2cm distal, it gives 
a diastolic murmur as blood ﬂ ows backwards; Traube’s sign: ‘pistol shot’ sound over 
femoral arteries; an Austin Flint murmur (p46) denotes severe AR.
Tests: ECG: LVH. CXR: cardiomegaly; dilated ascending aorta; pulmonary oedema. Echo 
is diagnostic. Cardiac catheterization to assess: severity of lesion; anatomy of aortic 
root; LV function; coronary artery disease; other valve disease.
Management: The main goal of medical therapy is to reduce systolic hypertension; 
ACE-i are helpful. Echo every 6–12 months to monitor. Indications for surgery: severe 
AR with enlarged ascending aorta, increasing symptoms, enlarging  LV or deterio-
rating LV function on echo; or infective endocarditis refractory to medical therapy. 
Aim to replace the valve before signiﬁ cant LV dysfunction occurs. Predictors of poor 
post-operative survival: ejection fraction <50%, NYHA class III or IV (p135), duration 
of CCF >12 months.

_OHCM_10e.indb   146

_OHCM_10e.indb   146

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
147

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fig 3.44  Severely calciﬁ ed aortic valve.

Reproduced with permission from Hamid Reza Taghipour.

Fig  3.45  This  is  one  of  the  two  main  types  of 
transcatheter  aortic  valve 
implants:  animal 
valve leaﬂ ets mounted on metal stents. This ex-
traordinary  stucture  must  be  resilient  against  the 
movement of the heart walls and the powerful ﬂ ow 
of  blood;  it  must  avoid  obstructing  forward  ﬂ ow 
of blood whilst providing a near-complete block to 
backﬂ ow; and it has surfaces of foreign material yet 
must  avoid  triggering  clots  or  allowing  microbial 
growth. On top of this, it must be able to fold down 
over a wire to allow safe passage through the ar-
terial tree from the groin to the heart, before being 
opened out by an inﬂ ated balloon.

Image courtesy of Edwards Lifesciences LLC, Irvine, 
CA. Edwards, Edwards Lifesciences, Edwards SAPIEN, 
SAPIEN, SAPIEN XT and SAPIEN 3 are trademarks of 
Edwards Lifesciences Corporation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   147

_OHCM_10e.indb   147

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
148

Right heart valve disease

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Tricuspid regurgitation Causes: Functional (RV dilatation; eg due to pulmonary 
hypertension induced by LV failure or PE); rheumatic fever; infective endocarditis (IV 
drug abuser5); carcinoid syndrome; congenital (eg ASD, AV canal, Ebstein’s anomaly 
(downward displacement of the tricuspid valve—see OHCS p642)); drugs (eg ergot-
derived dopamine agonists, p495; fenﬂ uramine). Symptoms: Fatigue; hepatic pain 
on  exertion  (due  to  hepatic  congestion);  ascites;  oedema  and  symptoms  of  the 
causative condition. Signs: Giant v waves and prominent y descent in JVP (p43); RV 
heave; pansystolic murmur, heard best at lower sternal edge in inspiration; pulsatile 
hepatomegaly; jaundice; ascites. Management: Drugs: diuretics for systemic con-
gestion; drugs to treat underlying cause. Valve repair or replacement (~10% 30-day 
mortality). Tricuspid regurgitation resulting from myocardial dysfunction or dilata-
tion has a mortality of up to 50% at 5 yrs.
Tricuspid stenosis Causes: Main cause is rheumatic fever, which almost always 
occurs with mitral or aortic valve disease. Also: congenital, infective endocarditis. 
Symptoms: Fatigue, ascites, oedema. Signs: Giant a wave and slow y descent in 
JVP (p43); opening snap, early diastolic murmur heard at the left sternal edge in 
inspiration. AF can also occur. Diagnosis: Echo. Treatment: Diuretics; surgical repair.
Pulmonary  stenosis  Causes:  Usually  congenital  (Turner  syndrome,  Noonan  syn-
drome,  Williams  syndrome,  Fallot’s  tetralogy,  rubella).  Acquired  causes:  rheumatic 
fever, carcinoid syndrome. Symptoms: Dyspnoea; fatigue; oedema; ascites. Signs: Dys-
morphic facies (congenital causes); prominent a wave in JVP; RV heave. In mild stenosis, 
there is an ejection click, ejection systolic murmur (which radiates to the left shoulder); 
widely split S2. In severe stenosis, the murmur becomes longer and obscures A2. P2 
becomes softer and may be inaudible. Tests: ECG: RAD, P-pulmonale, RVH, RBBB; echo/TOE 
(p110); CXR: prominent pulmonary arteries caused by post-stenotic dilatation. Cardiac 
catheterization is diagnostic. Treatment: Pulmonary valvuloplasty or valvotomy.
Pulmonary regurgitation Causes: Any cause of pulmonary hypertension (p194). 
Signs: Decrescendo murmur in early diastole at the left sternal edge (the Graham 
Steell murmur if associated with mitral stenosis and pulmonary hypertension).

Cardiac surgery

Cardiac surgery has come on a long way since 1923 when Dr Henry Souttar58,59 used 
his ﬁ nger to open a stenosed mitral valve in a beating heart.6 Cardiac bypass allows 
prolonged access to the open, static heart, during which complex and high-precision 
repair and replacement of valves and aortic roots can occur. Transcatheter proce-
dures are playing an increasing role in the management of cardiovascular disease. 
Key open heart procedures include:
Valve replacements Mechanical valves may be of the ball-cage (Starr–Edwards), 
tilting disc (Bjork–Shiley), or double tilting disc (St Jude) type. These valves are very 
durable but the risk of thromboembolism is high; patients require lifelong anticoagu-
lation. Xenografts are made from porcine valves or pericardium. These valves are 
less durable and may require replacement at 8–10yrs but have the advantage of not 
necessitating anticoagulation. Homografts are cadaveric valves. They are particu-
larly useful in young patients and in the replacement of infected valves. Complica-
tions of prosthetic valves: systemic embolism, infective endocarditis, haemolysis, 
structural valve failure, arrhythmias.
CABG See p123.
Cardiac transplantation Consider this when cardiac disease is severely curtailing 
quality of life, and survival is not expected beyond 6–12 months.
Surgery for congenital heart defects See p156.
Aortic root surgery Replacement/repair if dissection or aneurysmal.

5  Remember that it is the tricuspid valve which is the valve most vulnerable to events arriving by vein, eg 
pathogens from IV drug abusers or hormones (particularly 5-HT) from carcinoid tumours.
6  Souttar’s own description of this landmark case is available online: H S Souttar. The surgical treatment 
of mitral stenosis. BMJ 1925: 2(3379): 603–606. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   148

_OHCM_10e.indb   148

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
149

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

The heart in various, mostly rare, systemic diseases
This list reminds us to look at the heart and the whole patient, not just in exams 
(where those with odd syndromes congregate), but always.
Acromegaly: (p238) BP; LVH; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; high-output cardiac 
failure; coronary artery disease.
Amyloidosis: (p370) Restrictive cardiomyopathy. Bright myocardium on echo.
Ankylosing spondylitis: (p550) Conduction defects; AV block; AR.
Behçet’s disease: (p694) Aortic regurgitation; arterial ± venous thrombi.
Beta thalassaemia: (p342) Dilated and restrictive cardiomyopathies.
Carcinoid syndrome: (p271) Tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary stenosis.
Cushing’s syndrome: (p224) Hypertension.
Down’s syndrome: (OHCS p152) ASD; VSD; mitral regurgitation.
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome: (OHCS p642) Mitral valve prolapse; aortic aneurysm and 
dissection; hyperelastic skin; GI bleeds. Joints are loose and hypermobile; muta-
tions exist, eg in genes for procollagen (COL3A1); there are six types.
Friedreich’s ataxia: (p698) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dilatation over time.
Haemochromatosis: (p288) AF; cardiomyopathy.
Holt–Oram syndrome:  ASD or VSD with upper limb defects (eg polydactyly and 
triphalangeal thumb). 60
Human  immunodeﬁ ciency  virus:  (p398)  Myocarditis;  dilated  cardiomyop athy; 
eff usion; ventricular arrhythmias; SBE/IE; non-infective thrombotic (mar antic) en-
docarditis; RVF (pulmonary hypertension); metastatic Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Hypothyroidism: (p220) Sinus bradycardia; low pulse pressure; pericardial eff u-
sion; coronary artery disease; low-voltage ECG.
Kawasaki disease: (OHCS p646) Coronary arteritis similar to PAN; commoner than 
rheumatic fever (p142) as a cause of acquired heart disease.
Klinefelter’s  syndrome  :  (OHCS  p646)  ASD.  Psychopathy;  learning  diffi  culties; 
libido; gynaecomastia; sparse facial hair and small ﬁ rm testes. XXY.
Marfan’s syndrome: (p706) Mitral valve prolapse; AR; aortic dissection. Look for 
long ﬁ ngers and a high-arched palate.
Myotonic dystrophy (p510) Progressive conduction system disease; arrhythmias; 
LV dysfunction.
Noonan syndrome: (OHCS p650) ASD; pulmonary stenosis ± low-set ears.
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN): (p556) Small and medium vessel vasculitis + angina; 
MI; arrhythmias; CCF; pericarditis and conduction defects.
Rheumatoid  arthritis:  Conduction  defects;  pericarditis;  LV  dysfunction;  aortic 
regurgitation; coronary arteritis. Look for arthritis signs, p546.
Sarcoidosis: (p196) Inﬁ ltrating granulomas may cause complete AV block; ventric-
ular or supraventricular tachycardia; myocarditis; CCF; restrictive cardiomyopathy. 
ECG may show Q waves.
Syphilis: (p412) Myocarditis; ascending aortic aneurysm.
Systemic  lupus  erythematosus:  (p554)  Pericarditis/eff usion;  myocarditis;  Lib-
man–Sacks endocarditis; mitral valve prolapse; coronary arteritis.
Systemic sclerosis: (p552) Pericarditis; pericardial eff usion; myocardial ﬁ brosis; 
myocardial ischaemia; conduction defects; cardiomyopathy.
Thyrotoxicosis:  (p218)  Pulse;  AF  ±  emboli;  wide  pulse  pressure;  hyper dynamic 
apex; loud heart sounds; ejection systolic murmur; pleuro pericardial rub; angina; 
high-output cardiac failure.
Turner syndrome : Coarctation of aorta. Look for webbed neck. XO.
Williams syndrome: Supravalvular aortic stenosis (visuospatial IQ).

_OHCM_10e.indb   149

_OHCM_10e.indb   149

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
150

Infective endocarditis (IE)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fever + new murmur = endocarditis until proven otherwise. Any fever lasting >1wk in 
those known to be at risk7 must prompt blood cultures.61 Acute infective endocarditis 
(IE) tends to occur on ‘normal’ valves and may present with acute heart failure ± emboli; 
the commonest organism is Staph. aureus. Risk factors: skin breaches (dermatitis, IV 
lines, wounds); renal failure; immunosuppression; DM. Mortality: 5–50% (related to age 
and embolic events). Endocarditis on abnormal valves tends to run a subacute course. 
Risk factors: aortic or mitral valve disease; tricuspid valves in IV drug users; coarctation; 
patent ductus arteriosus; VSD; prosthetic valves. Endocarditis on prosthetic valves may 
be ‘early’ (within 60d of surgery, usually Staph. epidermidis, poor prognosis) or ‘late’.
Causes Bacteria: Bacteraemia occurs all the time, eg when we chew (not just during 
dentistry or medical interventions—which is why routine prophylaxis for such pro-
cedures does not make sense). 61 Strep. viridans is the commonest (usually subacute) 
followed by Staph. aureus, Strep. bovis (need colonoscopy ?tumour), Enterococci 
and Coxiella burnetii. Rarely: HACEK Gram Ωve bacteria (Haemoph ilus–Actinobacil-
lus–Cardiobact erium–Eikenella–Kingella); diphtheroids; Chlamydia. Fungi: Candida; 
Aspergillus; Histoplasma. Usually in IV drug abusers, immunocompromised patients 
or those with prosthetic valves. High mortality, need surgical management. Other: 
SLE (Libman–Sacks endocarditis); malignancy.
Signs  Septic  signs:  Fever,  rigors,  night  sweats,  malaise,  weight  loss,  anaemia, 
spleno meg aly,  and  clubbing  (ﬁ g  3.46).  Cardiac  lesions:  Any  new  murmur,  or  a 
change in pre-existing murmur, should raise the suspicion of endocarditis. Vegeta-
tions may cause valve destruction and severe regurgitation, or valve obstruction. An 
aortic root abscess causes prolongation of the PR interval, and may lead to complete 
AV block. LVF is a common cause of death. Immune complex deposition: Vasculitis 
(p556) may aff ect any vessel. Microscopic haematuria is common; glomerulonephri-
tis and acute kidney injury may occur. Roth spots (boat-shaped retinal haemorrhage 
with pale centre); splinter haemorrhages (ﬁ g 3.47); Osler’s nodes (painful pulp in-
farcts in ﬁ ngers or toes). Embolic phenomena: Emboli may cause abscesses in the 
relevant organ, eg brain, heart, kidney, spleen, gut (or lung if right-sided IE) or skin: 
termed Janeway lesions (ﬁ g 3.48; painless palmar or plantar macules), which, to-
gether with Osler’s nodes, are pathognomonic.
Diagnosis Use the Modiﬁ ed Duke criteria (BOX ‘Modified Duke criteria’).62, 63 Blood 
cultures: Do three sets at diff erent times from diff erent sites at peak of fever. 85–
90% are diagnosed from the 1st two sets; 10% are culture-negative. Blood tests: 
Normochromic, normocytic anaemia, neutrophilia, high ESR/CRP. Rheumatoid factor 
positive (an immunological phenomenon). Also check U&E, Mg2+, LFT. Urinalysis: For 
microscopic haematuria. CXR: Cardiomegaly, pulmonary oedema. Regular ECGs: To 
look for heart block. Echocardiogram: TTE (p110) may show vegetations, but only if 
>2mm. TOE (p110) is more sensitive, and better for visualizing mitral lesions and pos-
sible development of aortic root abscess. CT: To look for emboli (spleen, brain, etc.).
Treatment Liaise early with microbiologists and cardiologists.62 Antibiotics: see BOX  
‘Antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis’. Surgery if: Heart failure, valvular ob-
struction; repeated emboli; fungal IE; persistent bacteraemia; myocardial abscess; 
unstable infected prosthetic valve. 64
Prognosis 50% require surgery. 20% inhospital mortality (Staphs 30%; bowel bac-
teria 14%; Streps 6%). 15% recurrence at 2yrs.
Prevention Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for those at risk of 
IE undergoing invasive procedures. However, if they are given antibiotics for other 
reasons during a procedure, the antibiotic should cover the common IE organisms.
Recommendations Give clear information about prevention, including:
  • The importance of maintaining good oral health.
  • Symptoms that may indicate IE and when to seek expert advice.
  • The risks of invasive procedures, including non-medical procedures such as body 

piercing or tattooing.65

7  Past IE or rheumatic fever; IV drug abuser; damaged or replaced valve; PPM or ICD; structural congenital 
heart disease (but not simple ASD, fully repaired VSD, or patent ductus); hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   150

_OHCM_10e.indb   150

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
151

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Modiﬁ ed Duke criteria for infective endocarditis
Major criteria:
  • Positive blood culture:

  • Typical organism in 2 separate cultures or
  • Persistently +ve blood cultures, eg 3 >12h apart (or majority if >3) or
  • Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii.

  • Endocardium involved:

  • Positive echocardiogram (vegetation, abscess, pseudoaneurysm, dehiscence 

of prosthetic valve) or

  • Abnormal activity around prosthetic valve on PET/CT or SPECT/CT or
  • Paravalvular lesions on cardiac CT.

Minor criteria:
  • Predisposition (cardiac lesion; IV drug abuse).
  • Fever >38°C.
  • Vascular phenomena (emboli, Janeway’s lesions, etc.).
  • Immunological phenomena (glomerulonephritis, Osler’s nodes, etc.).
  • Positive blood culture that does not meet major criteria.
How to diagnose: Deﬁ nite infective endocarditis: 2 major or 1 major and 3 minor 
or all 5 minor criteria.

Antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis  
Prescribe antibiotics for infective endocarditis as follows.66 For more information 
on individual antibiotics, see tables 9.4–9.9, pp386–7.
  • Blind  therapy—native  valve  or  prosthetic  valve  implanted >1y  ago:  ampicillin, 
ﬂ ucloxacillin and gentamicin. Vancomycin + gentamicin if penicillin-allergic. If 
thought to be Gram Ωve: meropenem + vancomycin.

  • Blind therapy—prosthetic valve: vancomycin + gentamicin + rifampicin.
  • Staphs—native valve: ﬂ ucloxacillin for >4wks. If allergic or MRSA: vancomycin .
  • Staphs—prosthetic valves: ﬂ ucloxacillin + rifampicin + gentamicin for 6wks (re-
view need for gentamicin after 2wks). If penicillin-allergic or MRSA: vancomycin 
+ rifampicin + gentamicin.

  • Streps—fully sensitive to penicillin: benzylpenicillin 1.2g/4h IV for 4–6wks.8
  • Streps—less sensitive: benzylpenicillin + gentamicin; if penicillin allergic or highly 

penicillin resistant: vancomycin + gentamicin.

  • Enterococci: amoxicillin + gentamicin. If pen-allergic: vancomycin + gentamicin—

for 4wks (6wks if prosthetic valve); review need for gentamicin after 2wks.

  • HACEK  organisms  (Haemophilus,  Actinobacillus,  Cardiobacterium,  Eikenella, 

Kingella): ceftriaxone for 4wks with native valve or 6wks with prosthetic.

  • Fungal: Candida—amphotericin. Aspergillus—voriconazole. 

Fig  3.46  Clubbing  with  endo-
carditis.

Fig  3.47  Splinter  haemorrhag-
es are normally seen under the 
ﬁ ngernails or toenails. They are 
usually red-brown in colour.

Fig 3.48  Janeway’s lesions are 
non-tender erythematous, hae-
m orrhagic,  or  pustular  spots, 
eg on the palms or soles.

8  If Strep bovis is cultured, do colonoscopy, as a colon neoplasm is the likely portal of entry (table 6.3, p249).

_OHCM_10e.indb   151

_OHCM_10e.indb   151

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
152

Diseases of heart muscle

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Acute  myocarditis  This  is  inﬂ ammation  of  myocardium,  often  associated  with 
pericardial inﬂ ammation (myopericarditis).67 Causes: See table 3.3. Symptoms and 
signs:  ACS-like  symptoms,  heart  failure  symptoms,  palpitations,  tachycardia,  soft 
S1, S4 gallop (p44).Tests: ECG: ST changes and T-wave inversion, atrial arrhythmias, 
transient AV block, QT prolongation. Bloods: CRP, ESR, & troponin may be raised; viral 
serology and tests for other likely causes. Echo: diastolic dysfunction, regional wall 
abnormalities. Cardiac MR if clinically stable. Endomyocardial biopsy is gold stand-
ard. : Supportive. Treat the underlying cause. Treat arrhythmias and heart failure 
(p136). NSAID use is controversial. Avoid exercise as this can precipitate arrhythmias. 
Prognosis: 50% will recover within 4wks. 12–25% will develop DCM and severe heart 
failure. DCM can occur years after apparent recovery.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) A dilated, ﬂ abby heart of unknown cause. Associa-
tions: alcohol, BP, chemotherapeutics, haemochromatosis, viral infection, autoim-
mune, peri- or postpartum, thyrotoxicosis, congenital (X-linked). Prevalence: 0.2%. 
Presentation:  Fatigue,  dyspnoea,  pulmonary  oedema,  RVF,  emboli,  AF,  VT.  Signs: 
Pulse, BP, JVP, displaced and diff use apex, S3 gallop, mitral or tricuspid regurgita-
tion (MR/TR), pleural eff usion, oedema, jaundice, hepatomegaly, ascites. Tests: Blood: 
BNP (p137), Na+ indicates a poor prognosis. CXR: cardiomegaly, pulmonary oedema. 
ECG: tachycardia, non-speciﬁ c T-wave changes, poor R-wave progression. Echo: glob-
ally dilated hypokinetic heart and low ejection fraction. Look for  MR, TR, LV mural 
thrombus. : Bed rest, diuretics, -blockers, ACE-i, anticoag ul ation, biventricular pac-
ing, ICDs, LVADs, transplantation. Mortality: Variable, eg 40% in 2yrs.
Hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy  (HCM)  LV  outﬂ ow  tract  (LVOT)  obstruction  from 
asymmetric septal hypertrophy. HCM is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death 
in the young. Prevalence: 0.2%. Autosomal dominant inheritance, but 50% are spo-
radic. 70% have mutations in genes encoding -myosin, -tropomyosin, and troponin 
T. May present at any age. Ask about family history of sudden death. Symptoms and 
signs: Sudden death may be the ﬁ rst manifestation of HCM in many patients (VF is 
amenable to implantable deﬁ brillators), angina, dyspnoea, palpitation, syncope, CCF. 
Jerky pulse; a wave in JVP; double-apex beat; systolic thrill at lower left sternal edge; 
harsh ejection systolic murmur. Tests: • ECG: LVH; progressive T-wave inversion; deep 
Q waves (inferior + lateral leads); AF; WPW syndrome (p133); ventricular ectopics; VT. 
• Echo: asymmetrical septal hypertrophy; small LV cavity with hypercontractile pos-
terior wall; midsystolic closure of aortic valve; systolic anterior movement of mitral 
valve. • MRI: see ﬁ g 3.16. • Cardiac catheterization helps assess: severity of gradient; 
coronary artery disease or mitral regurgitation, but may provoke VT. • Electrophysi-
ological studies may be needed (eg if WPW, p133). • Exercise test ± Holter monitor 
(p125) to risk stratify. : -blockers or verapamil for symptoms (the aim is reducing 
ventricular contractility). Amiodarone (p130) for arrhythmias (AF, VT). Anticoagulate 
for paroxysmal  AF or systemic emboli. Septal myomectomy (surgical or chemical 
(with alcohol) to LV outﬂ ow tract gradient) is reserved for those with severe symp-
toms. Consider implantable deﬁ brillator—use http://www.doc2do.com/hcm/webHCM.html 
to assess risk of sudden cardiac death. Mortality: 5.9%/yr if <14yrs; 2.5%/yr if >14yrs. 
Poor prognostic factors: age <14yrs or syncope at presentation; family history of 
HCM/sudden death.
Restrictive  cardiomyopathy  Causes:  Idiopathic;  amyloidosis;  haemochromato-
sis;  sarcoid osis;  scleroderma;  Löffl  er’s  eosinophilic  endocarditis;  endomyocardial 
ﬁ brosis. Presentation: Is like constrictive pericarditis (p154). Features of RVF pre-
dominate: JVP, with prominent x and y descents; hepatomegaly; oedema; ascites. 
Diagnosis: Echo, MRI, cardiac catheterization. : Treat the cause.
Cardiac myxoma (ﬁ gs 3.49, 3.50) Rare benign cardiac tumour. Prevalence ≤5/10 000, 
:≈2:1. Usually sporadic, but may be familial (Carney complex: cardiac and cutane-
ous myxomas, skin pigmentation, endocrinopathy, etc., p223). It may mimic infective 
endocarditis (fever, weight loss, clubbing, ESR, systemic emboli), or mitral stenosis 
(left atrial obstruction, AF). A ‘tumour plop’ may be heard, and signs may vary ac-
cording to posture. Tests: Echo. : Excision.

_OHCM_10e.indb   152

_OHCM_10e.indb   152

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
153

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

How to inﬂ ame the heart
Table 3.3  Causes of myocarditis

Idiopathic
Viral

Bacterial

Spirochaetes

Protozoa
Drugs

Toxins
Immunological

50% of cases
Enteroviruses, adenoviruses, HHV6, EBV, CMV, inﬂ uenza, hepatitis, 
mumps, rubeola, Coxsackie, polio, HIV, HSV
Staph, Strep, Clostridia, diphtheria, TB, meningococcus, Myco-
plasma, brucellosis, psittacosis
Leptospirosis, syphilis, Lyme disease

Chagas’ (p423), Leishmania, toxoplasmosis
Cyclophosphamide, trastuzumab, penicillin, chloramphenicol, sul-
fonamides, methyldopa, spironolactone, phenytoin, carbamazepine
Cocaine, lithium, alcohol, lead, arsenic
SLE, sarcoid, Kawasaki, scleroderma, heart transplant rejection

Fig  3.49  Echocardiogram  of  a  35-yr-old  patient  who  presented  with 
severe exertional dyspnoea and several episodes of syncope. Look at 
the large mass (cardiac myxoma) in left atrium. Abbreviations: RV: right 
ventricle; LV: left ventricle; AV: aortic valve; AO: aorta; MV: mitral valve.

Reproduced with permission from Hamid Reza Taghipour.

Fig 3.50  Echocardiogram of the same patient as ﬁ g 3.49 during dias-
tole. Notice how the large mass of myxoma protrudes into the left ven-
tricle during diastole, and obstructs the mitral valve almost completely. 
Abbreviations: RV: right ventricle; LV: left ventricle; AO: aorta.

Reproduced with permission from Hamid Reza Taghipour.

_OHCM_10e.indb   153

_OHCM_10e.indb   153

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
154

Pericardial diseases

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Acute pericarditis This is inﬂ ammation of the pericardium.68
Causes: Idiopathic or secondary to:
  • Viruses: eg coxsackie, echovirus, EBV, CMV, adenovirus, mumps, varicella, HIV.
  • Bacteria: eg TB—commonest cause worldwide, Lyme disease, Q fever, pneumonia, 

rheumatic fever, Staphs, Streps, mycoplasma, legionella, MAI in HIV.

  • Fungi and parasitic: v rare, usually in immunocompromised.
  • Autoimmune: systemic autoimmune diseases eg  SLE,  RA; vasculitides eg Behçet, 

Takayasu; IBD; sarcoid; amyloid; Dressler’s (p698).

  • Drugs: eg procainamide, hydralazine, penicillin, isoniazid, chemotherapy.
  • Metabolic: uraemia, hypothyroidism, anorexia nervosa.
  • Others: trauma, surgery, malignancy, radiotherapy, MI, chronic heart failure.
Clinical features: Central chest pain worse on inspiration or lying ﬂ at ± relief by 
sitting forward. A pericardial friction rub (p46) may be heard. Look for evidence of 
a pericardial eff usion or cardiac tamponade (see later in topic). Fever may occur.
Tests: ECG classically shows concave (saddle-shaped) ST segment elevation and PR 
depression, but may be normal or non-speciﬁ c (10%); see ﬁ g 3.51. Blood tests: FBC, 
ESR, U&E, cardiac enzymes (NB: troponin may be raised); tests relating to possible aeti-
ologies. Cardiomegaly on CXR may indicate a pericardial eff usion. Echo (if suspected 
pericardial eff usion). CMR and CT may show localized inﬂ ammation.
Treatment: NSAIDs or aspirin with gastric protection for 1–2weeks. Add colchicine 
500mcg OD or BD for 3 months to reduce the risk of recurrence. Rest until symptoms 
resolve. Treat the cause. If not improving or autoimmune, consider steroids (may 
increase the risk of recurrence) or other immunosuppressive therapies.
Pericardial  eff  usion  Accumulation  of  ﬂ uid  in  the  pericardial  sac  (normally  10–
50mL).68  Causes:  Pericarditis,  myocardial  rupture  (haemopericardium—surgical, 
stab wound, post-MI); aortic dissection; pericardium ﬁ lling with pus; malignancy.
Clinical features: Dyspnoea, chest pain, signs of local structures being compressed—
hiccoughs (phrenic N), nausea (diaphragm), bronchial breathing at left base (Ewart’s 
sign: compressed left lower lobe). Muffl  ed heart sounds. Look for signs of cardiac 
tamponade (below).
Diagnosis: CXR shows an enlarged, globular heart if eff usion >300mL; ﬁ g 3.14. ECG 
shows low-voltage QRS complexes and may have alternating QRS morphologies (elec-
trical alternans). Echocard iography shows an echo-free zone surrounding the heart.
Management:  Treat the cause. Pericardiocentesis may be diagnostic (suspected 
bacterial pericarditis) or therapeutic (cardiac tamponade). See p773. Send pericar-
dial ﬂ uid for culture, ZN stain/TB culture, and cytology.
Constrictive pericarditis The heart is encased in a rigid pericardium.68
Causes: Often unknown (UK); elsewhere TB, or after any pericarditis.
Clinical features: These are mainly of right heart failure with JVP (with prominent 
x and y descents, p43); Kussmaul’s sign (JVP rising paradoxically with inspiration); 
soft, diff use apex beat; quiet heart sounds; S3; diastolic pericardial knock, hepato-
splenomegaly, ascites, and oedema.
Tests: CXR: small heart ± pericardial calciﬁ cation. CT/MRI—helps distinguish from re-
strictive cardiomyopathy. Echo. Cardiac catheterization.
Management: Surgical excision. Medical  to address the cause and symptoms.
Cardiac  tamponade  A  pericardial  eff usion  that  raises  intrapericardial  pressure, 
reducing ventricular ﬁ lling and thus dropping cardiac output.68  Can lead rapidly 
to cardiac arrest.
Signs: Pulse, BP, pulsus paradoxus, JVP, Kussmaul’s sign, muffl  ed S1 and S2.
Diagnosis: Beck’s triad: falling BP; rising JVP; muffl  ed heart sounds. ECG: low-voltage 
QRS ± electrical alternans. Echo is diagnostic: echo-free zone (>2cm, or >1cm if acute) 
around the heart ± diastolic collapse of right atrium and right ventricle.
Management:  Seek  expert  help.  The  pericardial  eff usion  needs  urgent  drainage 
(p773). Send ﬂ uid for culture, ZN stain/TB culture, and cytology.

_OHCM_10e.indb   154

_OHCM_10e.indb   154

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

1

1

5

5

5

5

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

6

6

Fig 3.51  Pericarditis. Note the widespread ‘saddle-shaped’ ST elevation—particularly clear in V5 and V6.

Cardiovascular medicine

1
5
5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156

Adult congenital heart disease (ACHD)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

This is a growing area of cardiology as increasing numbers of children with congenital 
heart defects survive to adulthood, sometimes as a result of complex restructuring 
procedures which have their own physiological implications (see BOX ‘Patients with 
one ventricle’). ACHD69 patients are at increased risk of many conditions described else-
where, for which many of the ‘standard’ investigations and therapies will apply: includ-
ing arrhythmias (p124), heart failure (p134), and infective endocarditis (p150).
Investigations Echocardiography (± bubble contrast) is ﬁ rst line. Increasingly, car-
diac CT and MR are used to provide precise anatomical and functional information. 
Cardiac catheterization generates data on oxygen saturation and pressure in diff er-
ent vessels and chambers. Exercise testing assesses functional capacity.
A few of the more common ACHDs are discussed below:
Bicuspid aortic valve These work well at birth and go undetected. Many even-
tually  develop  aortic  stenosis  (needing  valve  replacement)  ±  aortic  regurgitation 
predisposing to IE/SBE ± aortic dilatation/dissection. Intense exercise may accelerate 
complications, so do yearly echocardiograms on aff ected athletes. 70
Atrial septal defect (ASD) A hole connects the atria.
  • Ostium secundum defects: 80% cases; hole high in the septum; often asymptomat-
ic until adulthood when a LR shunt develops. Shunting depends on the compliance 
of the ventricles. LV compliance decreases with age (esp. if BP), so augmenting LR 
shunting; hence dyspnoea/heart failure, typically aged 40–60yrs.

  • Ostium  primum defects: associated with  AV valve anomalies, eg in Down’s syn-

drome; present in childhood.

Signs and symptoms: Chest pain, palpitations, dyspnoea. Arrhythmias incl. AF; JVP; 
wide, ﬁ xed split S2; pulmonary systolic ﬂ ow murmur. Pulmonary hypertension may 
cause pulmonary or tricuspid regurgitation, dyspnoea and haemoptysis. Frequency 
of migraine. Simple tests:  ECG:  RBBB with  LAD (primum defect) or  RAD (secundum 
defect).  CXR:  small  aortic  knuckle,  pulmonary  plethora,  atrial  enlargement.  Com-
plications:  • Reversal of left-to-right shunt, ie Eisen men ger’s  complex: initial LR 
shunt leads to pulmonary hypertension which increases right heart pressures until 
they exceed left heart pressures, hence shunt reversal. This causes cyanosis as de-
oxygenated blood enters systemic circulation. • Paradoxical emboli eg causing CVAs 
(veinartery via ASD; rare). Treatment: May close spontaenously. If not, primum de-
fects are usually closed in childhood. Secundum defects should be closed if sympto-
matic or signs of RV overload. Transcatheter closure is more common than surgical.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) A hole connects the ventricles. Causes: Congenital 
(prevalence 2:1000 births); acquired (post-MI). Symptoms: May present with severe 
heart  failure  in  infancy,  or  remain  asymptomatic  and  be  detected  incidentally  in 
later life. Signs: Classically, a harsh pan systolic murmur is heard at the left sternal 
edge, with a systolic thrill, ± left para sternal heave. Smaller holes, which are haemo-
dynamically less signiﬁ cant, give louder murmurs. Signs of pulmonary hypertension. 
Complications: AR, IE/SBE, pulmonary hypertension, Eisenmenger’s complex (above), 
heart failure from volume overload. Tests:  ECG: normal,  LAD, LVH,  RVH.  CXR: normal 
heart size ± mild pulmonary plethora (small VSD) or cardiomegaly, large pulmonary 
arteries and marked pulmonary plethora (large VSD). Cardiac catheter: step up in 
O2 saturation in right ventricle. Treatment: Initially medical as many close sponta-
neously. Indications for surgical closure: failed medical therapy, symptomatic VSD, 
shunt >3 : 1, SBE/IE. Endovascular closure may be possible. 71
Coarctation of the aorta Congenital narrowing of the descending aorta; usually 
occurs just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. More common in boys. 
Associations: Bicuspid aortic valve; Turner’s syndrome. Signs: Radiofemoral delay; 
weak femoral pulse; BP; scapular bruit; systolic murmur (best heard over the left 
scapula); cold feet. Complications: Heart failure from high afterload; IE; intracer-
ebral haemorrhage. Tests: CT or MRI-aortogram; CXR may show rib notching as blood 
diverts down intercostal arteries to reach the lower body, causing these vessels to 
dilate and erode local rib bone. Treatment: Surgery, or balloon dilatation ± stenting.
Tetralogy of Fallot See p157.

_OHCM_10e.indb   156

_OHCM_10e.indb   156

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
157

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Fallot’s tetralogy: what the non-specialist needs to know
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common cyanotic congenital heart disorder 
(prevalence: 3–6 per 10 000). It is also the most common cyanotic heart defect that 
survives to adulthood, accounting for 10% of all ACHD. 72 It is believed to be due to 
abnormalities in separation of the truncus arteriosus into the aorta and pulmo-
nary arteries early in gestation (ﬁ g 3.52).
The ‘tetralogy’ of features are:

1      Ventricular septal defect (VSD).
2      Pulmonary stenosis.
3      Right ventricular hypertrophy.
4      The aorta overrides the VSD, accepting right heart 

blood.

Fig 3.52  Tetralogy of Fallot.

Reproduced from Thorne et al., 
Adult Congenital Heart Disease, 
2009, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

A few patients also have an ASD, which makes up the 
pentad of Fallot. 
Presentation: Severity of illness depends greatly on 
the  degree  of  pulmonary  stenosis.  Infants  may  be 
acyanotic at birth, with a pulmonary stenosis mur-
mur as the only initial ﬁ nding. Gradually (especially 
after closure of the ductus arteriosus) they become 
cyanotic due to decreasing ﬂ ow of blood to the lungs 
and increasing right-to-left ﬂ ow across the VSD. Dur-
ing a hypoxic spell, the child becomes restless and 
agitated. Toddlers may squat, which is typical of TOF, 
as it increases peripheral vascular resistance, there-
by decreasing the degree of right to left shunt.  Adult patients are often asymp-
tomatic. In the unoperated adult patient, cyanosis is common, although extreme 
cyanosis or squatting is uncommon. In repaired patients, late symptoms include 
exertional dyspnoea, palpitations, clubbing, RV failure, syncope, and even sudden 
death.  Investigations:  ECG  shows  RV  hypertrophy  with  a  right  bundle-branch 
block. CXR may be normal, or show the hallmark of TOF, which is the classic boot-
shaped  heart  (ﬁ g  3.53).  Echocardiography 
can show the anatomy as well as the degree 
of stenosis. Cardiac CT and cardiac MRI can 
give  valuable  information  for  planning  the 
surgery. 73
Management: Surgery is usually done be-
fore 1yr of age, with closure of the VSD and 
correction of pulmonary stenosis.
Prognosis: Without surgery, mortality rate 
is ~95% by age 20. After repair, 85% of pa-
tients survive to 35yrs. Common problems in 
adulthood include pulmonary regurgitation, 
causing RV dilatation and failure; RV outﬂ ow 
tract obstruction; AR; LV dysfunction; and ar-
rhythmias. 

Fig 3.53  Boot-shaped heart.

Courtesy of Dr Edward Singleton.

Patients with one ventricle
Many patients born with single-ventricle hearts (eg hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome) will undergo a Fontan procedure. This results in systemic venous blood 
ﬂ owing directly into the pulmonary arteries and the single ventricle being used 
to  pump  oxygenated  blood  into  the  aorta.  The  lack  of  a  right  heart  results  in 
many of the signs and symptoms of right heart failure and puts the patient at 
risk  of  rapid  cardiac  decompensation.  When  looking  after  these  patients, 
seek advice from specialist ACHD centres. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   157

_OHCM_10e.indb   157

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
158

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Driving and the heart  
UK licences are inscribed ‘You are required by law to inform Drivers Medical Branch, 
DVLA, Swansea SA99 1AT at once if you have any disability (physical or medical), which 
is, or may become likely to aff ect your ﬁ tness as a driver, unless you do not expect 
it to last more than 3 months’. It is the responsibility of drivers to inform the DVLA 
(the UK Driving and Vehicle Licensing Authority), and that of their doctors to advise 
patients that medical conditions74 (and drugs) may aff ect their ability to drive and 
for which conditions patients should inform the  DVLA. Drivers should also inform 
their insurance company of any condition disclosed to the DVLA. If in doubt, ask your 
defence union.
The following are examples of the guidance for holders of standard licences; diff er-
ent rules apply for group 2 vehicle licence-holders (eg lorries, buses). More can be 
found at https://www.gov.uk/guidance/cardiovascular-disorders-assessing-ﬁ tness-to-drive.
Angina Driving must cease when symptoms occur at rest or with emotion. Driving 
may recommence when satisfactory symptom control is achieved.  DVLA need not 
be notiﬁ ed.
Angioplasty Driving must cease for 1wk, and may recommence thereafter provided 
no other disqualifying condition. DVLA need not be notiﬁ ed.
MI If successfully treated with angioplasty, cease driving for 1 week provided urgent 
intervention not planned and LVEF (left ventricular ejection fraction) >40%, and no 
other disqualifying condition. Otherwise, driving must cease for 1 month. DVLA need 
not be notiﬁ ed.
Dysrhythmias Including sinoatrial disease, AF/ﬂ utter, atrioventricular conduction 
defects, and narrow or broad complex tachycardias. Driving must cease if the dys-
rhythmia has caused or is likely to cause incapacity. Driving may recommence 4wks 
after successful control provided there is no other disqualifying condition.
Pacemaker implant Stop driving for 1wk, the patient must notify the DVLA.
Implanted  cardioverter/deﬁ brillator  The  licence  is  subject  to  annual  review. 
Driving may occur when these criteria can be met:
  • 6 months have passed since ICD implanted for secondary prevention.
  • 1 month has passed since ICD implanted for primary prophylaxis.
  • The device has not administered therapy (shock and/or symptomatic antitachycar-

dia pacing) within the last 6 months (except during testing).

  • No therapy (shock) in the last 2 years has been accompanied by incapacity (wheth-
er caused by the device or arrhythmia)—unless this was a result of device malfunc-
tion which has been corrected for at least 1 month or steps have been taken to 
avoid recurrence (eg ablation) which have been successful for at least 6 months.
  • A period of 1 month off  driving must occur following any revision of the device 

(generator and/or electrode) or alteration of antiarrhythmics.

  • The device is subject to regular review with interrogation.
  • There is no other disqualifying condition.
Syncope Simple faint: No restriction. Unexplained syncope: With probable car-
diac aetiology—4wks off  driving if cause identiﬁ ed and treated; otherwise 6 months 
off .  Loss  of  consciousness  or  altered  awareness  associated  with  signs  of  seizure 
requires 6 months off  driving. If the patient is known to be epileptic or has had 
another such episode in the preceeding 5yrs, they must abstain from driving for 
1yr. See driving and epilepsy (BOX). Patients who have had a single episode of loss of 
consciousness with no cause found despite neurological and cardiac investigations, 
must abstain from driving for 6 months.
Hypertension Driving may continue unless treatment causes unacceptable side-
eff ects. DVLA need not be notiﬁ ed.

_OHCM_10e.indb   158

_OHCM_10e.indb   158

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
159

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

Other conditions: UK DVLA  states it must be informed if a driver suff  ers 
from medical conditions including:
  • Epilepsy (the patient must have had at least two seizures in the last 5yrs). An 
epileptic  patient  who  has  suff ered  an  epileptic  attack  while  awake  must  not 
drive for 1yr from the date of the attack. Patients who have seizures that do 
not aff ect their consciousness (eg simple partial seizures) or seizures only dur-
ing sleep may be allowed to drive. Being allowed to drive is conditional on the 
patient following medical advice and there not being reason to believe they are 
at high risk of further seizures.

  • TIA or stroke. These patients should not drive for at least 1 month. There is no 
need to inform the DVLA unless there is residual neurological defect after 1 month, 
eg visual ﬁ eld defect. If TIAS have been recurrent and frequent, a 3-month period 
free of attacks may be required.

  • Sudden attacks or disabling giddiness, fainting, or blackouts.
  • Chronic  neurological  conditions  including  multiple  sclerosis,  Parkinson’s  (any 

‘freezing’ or on–off  eff ects), and motor neuron diseases.

  • Severe mental disorders; including serious memory problems and severe psy-
chiatric illness. Those with dementia should only drive if the condition is mild 
(do not rely on armchair judgements: on-the-road trials are better). Encourage 
relatives to contact DVLA if a dementing relative should not be driving. GPs may 
desire to breach conﬁ dentiality (the GMC approves) and inform DVLA of demented 
or psychotic patients (tel. 01792 783686). Many elderly drivers (~1 in 3) who die in 
accidents are found to have Alzheimer’s.

  • A pacemaker, deﬁ brillator, or antiventricular tachycardia device ﬁ tted.
  • Diabetes controlled by insulin or tablets. The main issues which may result in 

driving bans are impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia and impaired vision.

  • Angina while driving.
  • Any type of brain surgery, brain tumour. Severe head injury involving inpatient 

treatment at hospital.

  • Continuing/permanent diffi  culty in the use of arms or legs which aff ects ability 

to control a vehicle.

  • Dependence on or misuse of alcohol, illicit drugs, or chemical substances in the 

past 3yrs (do not include drink/driving off ences).

  • Any visual disability which aff ects both eyes (do not declare short/long sight or 

colour blindness).

Vision (new drivers) should be 6/9 on Snellen’s scale in the better eye and 6/12 on 
the Snellen scale in the other eye, wearing glasses or contact lenses if needed, and 
3/60 in each eye without glasses or contact lenses.
The above-listed rules apply to standard licences only, for group 2 entitlement (eg 
HGV drivers) see www.dvla.gov.uk/medical/ataglance.aspx.

_OHCM_10e.indb   159

_OHCM_10e.indb   159

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
4  Chest medicine

Contents
Respiratory health  161

Investigations
Bedside tests in chest medicine  162
Further investigations in chest 

medicine  164

Pulmonary conditions:
Pneumonia  166
Speciﬁ c pneumonias  168
Complications of
pneumonia  170
Bronchiectasis  172
Cystic ﬁ brosis (CF)  173
Lung tumours  174
Lung tumours: staging and 

treatment  176

Fungi and the lung  177
Asthma  178
Management of chronic 

asthma  182

Chronic obstructive pulmonary 

disease (COPD)  184

Acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS)  186
Respiratory failure  188
Pulmonary embolism (PE)  190
Pneumothorax  190
Pleural eff usion  192
Obstructive sleep apnoea 

syndrome  194
Cor pulmonale  194
Sarcoidosis  196
Interstitial lung disease (ILD)  198
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis 

(EAA)  198

Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis 

(IPF)  200

Industrial dust diseases  201

Fig 4.1  In 1948, the Medical Research Council pub-
lished a landmark paper in the BMJ about streptomy-
cin as a treatment for pulmonary TB. The paper was 
regarded as a milestone in the history of clinical trials 
and set a precedent for the use of randomization in 
controlled trials. Before this, bed rest alone had been 
standard treatment for patients with pulmonary TB. 
After the successes of penicillin, there was excitement 
in  the  discovery  that  streptomycin  proved  eff ective 
against the tubercle bacilli. Patients aged 15 to 30 with 
‘acute  progressive  bilateral  pulmonary  tuberculosis 
of presumably recent origin, bacteriologically proved 
and unsuitable for collapse therapy’ were entered into 
the  trial.  The  streptomycin  and  bed  rest  group  did 
better initially but the development of resistance was 
soon recognized. This was a new phenomenon which 
had not then been seen with penicillin. This led to the 
notion  that  combination  therapies  were  needed  to 
overcome TB drug resistance. The ‘Edinburgh Method’, 
described in 1957, advocated the use of triple therapy.

Reproduced from the BMJ, volume 2, Jan 1, © 1948, with 
permission from BMJ Publishing Group

We thank Dr Phillippa Lawson, our Specialist Reader, and William Flowers, our Junior Reader, 
for their contribution to this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   160

_OHCM_10e.indb   160

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

161

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Respiratory health
The  lungs  provide  a  vital  physiological  function  in  allowing  gas  exchange,  but 
are  also  at  the  vanguard  of  a  constant  battle  between  host,  pathogens,  and
pollutants. Respiratory medicine exempliﬁ es how careful epidemiology, science, 
and randomized controlled trials have revolutionized our understanding of com-
mon diseases, leading to preventative measures and eff ective treatments. How-
ever, the importance of poverty and general improvements in public health cannot 
be underestimated. Rates of TB in the UK declined well before the introduction of 
BCG vaccination and streptomycin, largely due to improvements in sanitation and 
less dense living conditions. Public health campaigns and taxation have helped 
lower smoking rates, although reductions in lung cancer will lag behind for many 
years.

Larynx

Trachea

Superior lobe
of right lung

Right primary
bronchus

Right
secondary
bronchus
Right tertiary
bronchus

Inferior lobe
of right lung

Smaller
bronchi

Middle lobe

Primary bronchi
Secondary bronchi
Tertiary bronchi
Smaller bronchi

Superior lobe
of left lung

Left primary
bronchus

Left
secondary
bronchus

Left tertiary
bronchus

Inferior lobe
of left lung

Smaller
bronchi

Fig 4.2  Segmental anatomy of the lungs and main bronchi. The left lung has two lobes and the 
right has three.

_OHCM_10e.indb   161

_OHCM_10e.indb   161

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
162

Bedside tests in chest medicine

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

There is no substitute for careful history taking and examination in making the ‘correct’ 
diagnosis. Tests should help clarify and assess severity. When examining the chest 
think about the anatomy, and the location of pathology (ﬁ g 4.2).
Sputum examination Collect a good sample; if necessary ask a physiotherapist to 
help. Note the appearance: clear and colourless (chronic bronchitis), yellow-green or 
brown (pulmonary infection), red (haemoptysis), black (smoke, coal dust), or frothy 
white-pink (pulmonary oedema). Send the sample to the laboratory for microscopy, 
culture/sensitivity. If indicated, ask for ZN stain, and PCR.
Peak expiratory ﬂ ow (PEF) Measured by a maximal forced expiration through a peak 
ﬂ ow meter. It correlates well with the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) & is 
used as an estimate of airway calibre in asthma, but is eff ort-dependent.
Pulse oximetry Allows non-invasive assessment of peripheral O2 saturation (SpO2). 
Useful for monitoring those who are acutely ill or at risk of deterioration. Target oxy-
gen saturations are usually 94–98% in a well patient or 88–92% in those with certain 
pre-exisiting lung pathology (eg COPD). Oxygen saturation of <92% in a normally well 
person is a serious sign and arterial blood gases (ABGS) should be checked. Causes 
of erroneous readings: poor perfusion, movement, skin pigmentation, nail varnish, 
dys haemoglobin aemias, and carbon monoxide poisoning. As with any bedside test, 
be sceptical, and check ABGS, whenever indicated (p188).
Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis Heparinized blood is usually taken from the radial 
or femoral artery (see p771). The brachial artery is used less because of median nerve 
proximity and it is an end artery. pH, PaO2, PaCO2, HCO3 are measured using an auto-
mated analyser.
ABG interpretation See pp188–9.
Spirometry (See table 4.1) Measures functional lung volumes. Forced expiratory 
volume in 1s (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) are measured from a full forced ex-
piration into a spirometer (Vitalograph®); exhalation continues until no more breath 
can be exhaled. FEV1 is less eff ort-dependent than PEF. The FEV1/FVC ratio gives a good 
estimate of the severity of airﬂ ow obstruction; and helps classify COPD severity. Ob-
structive defect: (ﬁ g 4.3) Asthma, bronchiectasis, COPD, cystic ﬁ brosis. Restrictive 
defect:  Fibrosis,  sarcoidosis,  pneumoconiosis,  interstitial  pneumonias,  connective 
tis sue diseases, pleural eff usion, obesity, kyphoscoliosis, neuromuscular problems.

_OHCM_10e.indb   162

_OHCM_10e.indb   162

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
Table 4.1  Spirometry results (data source NICE COPD 2010 guidelines)

Normal
Restrictive
Obstructive

FEV1
>80% predicted
<80% predicted
<80% predicted

FVC
>80% predicted
<80% predicted
Normal or low

FEV1/FVC ratio
75–80%
>70% normal
<70% predicted

Fig 4.3  Examples of spirograms.

163

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

_OHCM_10e.indb   163

_OHCM_10e.indb   163

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
164

Further investigations in chest medicine

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Lung  function  tests  PEF,  FEV1,  FVC (see p162). Total  lung  capacity (TLC) and re-
sidual volume (RV) are useful in distinguishing obstructive and restrictive diseases 
(see ﬁ g 4.4). TLC and RV are increased in obstructive airways disease and reduced in 
restrictive lung diseases and musculoskeletal abnormalities. The gas transfer coef-
ﬁ cient (KCO) represents the carbon monoxide diff using capacity (DLCO) corrected for 
alveolar volume. It is calculated by measuring carbon monoxide uptake from a single 
inspiration in a standard time (usually 10s) and lung volume by helium dilution. Low 
in emphysema and interstitial lung disease, high in alveolar haemorrhage. 1 Flow– 
volume loop (see ﬁ g 4.5) measures ﬂ ow at various lung volumes. Characteristic pat-
terns are seen with intra-thoracic airways obstruction (asthma, emphysema) and 
extra-thoracic airways obstruction (tracheal stenosis).
Radiology  Chest  x-ray:  See  p722.  Ultrasound:  Used  in  diagnosing  and  guiding 
drainage of pleural eff usions (particularly loculated eff usions) and empyema. Ra-
dionuclide scans: Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q, p738) scans are occasionally used to 
diagnose pulmonary embolism (PE), eg in pregnancy (unmatched perfusion defects 
are seen). Bone scans are used to diagnose bone metastases. PET scans to assess 
cancer and inﬂ ammation. Computed tomography: (CT, p730) Used for diagnosing 
and  staging  lung  cancer,  imaging  the  hila,  mediastinum,  and  pleura,  and  guiding 
biopsies. Thin (1–1.5mm) section high-resolution CT (HRCT) is used in the diagnosis of 
interstitial lung disease, emphysema, and bronchiectasis. CT pulmonary angiography 
(CTPA) is used in the diagnosis of PE. Pulmonary angiography: Now rarely used for 
diagnosing pulmonary hypertension.
Fibreoptic  bronchoscopy  Performed  under  local  anaesthetic  via  the  nose  or 
mouth. Diagnostic indications: Suspected lung carcinoma, slowly resolving pneu-
monia, pneumonia in the immunosuppressed, interstitial lung disease. Bronchoal-
veolar  lavage  ﬂ uid  may  be  sent  to  the  lab  for  microscopy,  culture,  and  cytology. 
Mucosal abnormalities may be brushed (cytology) and biopsied (histopathology). 
Therapeutic indications: Aspiration of mucus plugs causing lobar collapse, removal 
of foreign bodies, stenting or treating tumours, eg laser. Pre-procedure investiga-
tions: FBC, coagulation, CXR, CT, spirometry, pulse oximetry, and ABG (if indicated). 
Complications: Hypoxia, bleeding, pneumo thorax (ﬁ g 16.43, p749). Diagnostic sensi-
tivity for cancer 50–90%, depends on tumour location; gene proﬁ ling of cell sample 
may improve this. 2 May also be used to deliver an ultrasound probe (endobronchial 
ultrasound), and treatments—eg stents, or cryotherapy.
Bronchoalveolar  lavage  (BAL)  is  performed  at  the  time  of  bronchoscopy  by  in-
stilling and aspirating a known volume of warmed, buff ered 0.9% saline into the 
distal airway. Diagnostic indications: Suspected malignancy, pneumonia, in the im-
munosuppressed (especially HIV), bronchiectasis, suspected TB (if sputum negative), 
interstitial lung diseases (eg sarcoidosis, extrinsic allergic alveolitis, histiocytosis X). 
Therapeutic indications: alveolar proteinosis.1 Complications: Hypoxia (give sup-
plemental O2), transient fever, transient CXR shadow, infection (rare).
Lung biopsy May be performed in several ways. Percutaneous needle biopsy is 
performed under radiological guidance and is useful for peripheral lung and pleural 
lesions. Transbronchial  biopsy performed at bronchoscopy may help in diagnos-
ing interstitial lung diseases, eg sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis. Alterna-
tives: If unsuccessful, consider open lung biopsy or video-assisted thoracoscopy.
Surgical procedures are performed under general anaesthetic. Rigid bronchos-
copy provides a wide lumen, enables larger mucosal biopsies, control of bleeding, 
and removal of foreign bodies. Mediastinoscopy and mediastinotomy enable ex-
amination and biopsy of the mediastinal lymph nodes/lesions. Thoracoscopy allows 
examination  and  biopsy  of  pleural  lesions,  drainage  of  pleural  eff usions,  and  talc 
pleurodesis and pleurectomy.

1  Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis causes cough, dyspnoea, and restrictive spirometry. It is caused by ac-
cumulation of surfactant-derived acidophilic phospholipid/protein compounds which ﬁ ll alveoli and distal 
bronchioles. Diagnosis may require lung biopsy. Cause: primary genetic or antibody problem, or secondary 
to inﬂ ammation caused by inhaling silica, aluminium, or titanium. 3

_OHCM_10e.indb   164

_OHCM_10e.indb   164

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
165

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.4  Lung volumes: physiological and pathological. 

Fig 4.5  Flow–volume loops.
PEF=peak expiratory ﬂ ow; FEF50=forced expiratory ﬂ ow at 50% TLC;
FEF25=forced expiratory ﬂ ow at 25% TLC; PIF=peak inspiratory ﬂ ow;
FIF50=forced inspiratory ﬂ ow at 50% TLC.

_OHCM_10e.indb   165

_OHCM_10e.indb   165

02/05/2017   19:06

02/05/2017   19:06

 
166

Pneumonia

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

An  acute  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  associated  with  fever,  symptoms  and 
signs in the chest, and abnormalities on the chest x-ray—ﬁ g 16.2, p723. Incidence: 
5–11/1000,  if very young or old (30% are under 65yrs). Mortality: ~21% in hospital.
Classiﬁ cation and causes
Community-acquired  pneumonia: (CAP) May be primary or secondary to under-
lying  disease.  Typical  organisms:  Streptococcus  pneumoniae  (commonest),  Hae-
mophilus inﬂ uenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis. Atypicals: Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Legionella species, and Chlamydia. Gram-negative bacilli, 
Coxiella burnetii and anaerobes are rarer (?aspiration). Viruses account for up to 
15%. Flu may be complicated by community-acquired MRSA pneumonia.
Hospital-acquired:  Deﬁ ned  as  >48h  after  hospital  admission.  Most  commonly 
Gram-negative  enterobacteria  or  Staph.  aureus.  Also  Pseudomonas,  Klebsiella, 
Bacteroides, and Clostridia.
Aspiration: Those with stroke, myasthenia, bulbar palsies, consciousness (eg post-
ictal or intoxicated), oesophageal disease (achalasia, reﬂ ux), or poor dental hygiene 
risk aspirating oropharyngeal anaerobes.
Immunocompromised patient: Strep. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, Staph. aureus, 
M. catarrhalis, M. pneumoniae, Gram Ωve bacilli and Pneumocystis jirovecii (for-
merly named P. carinii, pp400–1). Other fungi, viruses (CMV, HSV), and mycobacteria.
Clinical  features  Symptoms:  Fever,  rigors,  malaise,  anorexia,  dyspnoea,  cough, 
purulent sputum, haemoptysis, and pleuritic pain. Signs: Pyrexia, cyanosis, confus-
ion  (can  be  the  only  sign  in  the  elderly—may  also  be  hypothermic),  tachypnoea, 
tachycardia,  hypotension,  signs  of  consolidation  (reduced  expansion,  dull  percus-
sion, tactile vocal fremitus/vocal resonance, bronchial breathing), and a pleural rub.
Tests Assess oxygenation: oxygen saturation, p162 (ABGs if SaO2 <92% or severe 
pneumonia) and BP. Blood tests: FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP (GPs should consider a point of care 
CRP to guide antibiotic prescribing where LRTI is suspected, NICE 20144).
CXR (ﬁ g 16.2, p723): lobar or multilobar inﬁ ltrates, cavitation, or pleural eff usion. Spu-
tum for microscopy and culture. Urine: check for Legionella/Pneumococcal urinary 
antigens. Atypical organism/viral serology (PCR sputum/BAL, complement ﬁ xation 
tests acutely, paired serology). Pleural ﬂ uid may be aspirated for culture. Respira-
tory physicians may consider bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage if patient 
is immunocompromised or on ITU.
Severity ‘CURB-65’ is a simple, validated severity scoring system.5, 6 1 point for each of:
Confusion (abbreviated mental test ≤8)
Urea >7mmol/L
Respiratory rate ≥30/min
BP <90 systolic and/or 60mmHg diastolic)
Age ≥65.
0–1, PO antibiotic/home treatment; 2, hospital therapy; ≥3, severe pneumonia indicates 
mortality 15–40%—consider ITU. It may ‘underscore’ the young—use clinical judgement. 
Other features increasing the risk of death are: comorbidity; bilateral/multilobar; PaO2 
<8kPa.
Management p816. Antibiotics—refer to your local hospital antibiotic policy. When 
none exists, consult table 4.2. If pneumonia not severe and not vomiting (CURB-65 1–2) 
give PO antibiotic; severe (CURB-65 >2) give IV. Oxygen: keep PaO2 >8.0 and/or satura-
tion ≥94%. IV ﬂ uids (anorexia, dehydration, shock) and VTE prophylaxis. Analgesia if 
pleurisy. Consider ITU if shock, hypercapnia, or remains hypoxic. Follow-up: at 6 weeks 
(±CXR).
Complications  (See  p170.)  Pleural  eff usion,  empyema,  lung  abscess,  respiratory 
failure,  septicaemia,  brain  abscess,  pericarditis,  myocarditis,  cholestatic  jaundice. 
Repeat CRP and CXR in patients not improving to look for progression/complications.

_OHCM_10e.indb   166

_OHCM_10e.indb   166

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
167

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Organisms

Table 4.2  Empirical treatment of pneumonia (check local policy)
Clinical 
setting
Community-acquired
Mild not 
previously 
CURB 0–1

Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae

Antibiotic (further dosage
details: pp386–7)

Oral amoxicillin 500mg–1g/8h or clarithro-
mycin 500mg/12h or doxy cycline 200mg 
loading then 100mg/day (initially 5-day 
course)
Oral amoxicillin 500mg–1g/8h + 
clarithromycin 500mg/12h or doxy cycline 
200mg loading then 100mg/12h 
If IV required: amoxicillin 500mg/8h + 
clarithromycin 500mg/12h (7-day course)
Co-amoxiclav 1 . 2g/8h IV or cephalosporin IV 
(eg cefuroxime 1 . 5g/8h IV) AND clarithromy-
cin 500mg/12h IV (7 days)
Add ﬂ ucloxacillin ± rifampicin if Staph sus-
pected; vancomycin (or teicoplanin) if MRSA 
suspected. Treat for 10d (14–21d if Staph, 
Legionella, or Gram Ωve enteric bacteria 
suspected)
Seek urgent help. Consider adding IV 
linezolid, clindamycin, and rifampicin

Fluoroquinolone combined with clarithro-
mycin, or rifampicin, if severe. See p168
Tetracycline
High-dose co-trimoxazole (pp400–1)

Moderate
CURB 2

Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae

Severe
CURB >3

As above

Atypical

Panton-Valentine 
Leukocidin-producing 
Staph. aureus (PVL-SA)
Legionella pneumophilia

Chlamydophila species
Pneumocystis jirovecii

Hospital-acquired

Gram-negative bacilli
Pseudomonas
Anaerobes

Aminoglycoside IV + antipseudomonal 
penicillin IV or 3rd-generation cephalosporin 
IV (p387)

Aspiration

Streptococcus pneumoniae
Anaerobes

Cephalosporin IV + metronidazole IV

Neutropenic patients

Gram-positive cocci
Gram-negative bacilli
Fungi (p177)

Aminoglycoside IV + antipseudomonal peni-
cillin IV or 3rd-generation cephalosporin IV
Consider antifungals after 48h

Pneumococcal vaccine
At-risk groups:
• All adults ≥ 65yrs old.
• Chronic heart, liver, renal, or lung conditions.
• Diabetes mellitus not controlled by diet.
• Immun o sup pression, eg spleen function, AIDS, or on chemotherapy or prednis-
olone  >20mg/d,  cochlear  implant,  occupation  risk  (eg  welders),  CSF  ﬂ uid  leaks. 
Vaccinate every 5yrs.
CI: Pregnancy, lactation, T°, previous anaphylaxis to vaccine or one of its com-
ponents.

_OHCM_10e.indb   167

_OHCM_10e.indb   167

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
168

Speciﬁ c pneumonias

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Pneumococcal pneumonia The commonest bacterial pneumonia. Aff ects all ages, 
but is commoner in the elderly, alcoholics, post-splenectomy, immunosuppressed, 
and patients with chronic heart failure or pre-existing lung disease. Clinical fea-
tures: Fever, pleurisy, herpes labialis. CXR shows lobar consolidation. If mod/severe 
check for urinary antigen. Treatment: amoxicillin, benzylpenicillin, or cephalosporin.
Staphylococcal  pneumonia  May  complicate  inﬂ uenza  infection  or  occur  in  the 
young, elderly, intravenous drug users, or patients with underlying disease, eg leu-
kaemia, lymphoma, cystic ﬁ brosis (CF). It causes a bilateral cavitating bronchopneu-
monia. Treatment: ﬂ ucloxacillin ± rifampicin, MRSA: contact lab; consider vancomycin.
Klebsiella pneumonia Rare. Occurs in elderly, diabetics, and alcoholics. Causes a 
cavitating pneumonia, particularly of the upper lobes, often drug resistant. Treat-
ment: cefotaxime or imipenem.
Pseudomonas  A  common  pathogen  in  bronchiectasis  and  CF.  It  also  causes 
hospital-acquired infections, particularly on ITU or after surgery. Treatment: anti-
pseudomonal penicillin, ceftazidime, meropenem, or ciproﬂ oxacin + aminoglycoside. 
Consider dual therapy to minimize resistance.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae Occurs in epidemics about every 4yrs. It presents in-
sidiously with ﬂ u-like symptoms (headache, myalgia, arthralgia) followed by a dry 
cough. CXR: reticular-nodular shadowing or patchy consolidation often of one lower 
lobe, and worse than signs suggest. Diagnosis: PCR sputum or serology. Cold aggluti-
nins may cause an autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. Complications: Skin rash (ery-
thema multiforme, ﬁ g 12.22, p563), Stevens–Johnson syndrome, meningo encephalitis 
or  myelitis;  Guillain–Barré  syndrome.  Treatment:  Clarithromycin  (500mg/12h)  or 
doxycycline (200mg loading then 100mg  OD) or a ﬂ uroquinolone (eg ciproﬂ oxacin 
or norﬂ oxacin).
Legionella pneumophila Colonizes water tanks kept at <60°C (eg hotel air-con-
ditioning  and  hot  water  systems)  causing  outbreaks.  Flu-like  symptoms  (fever, 
malaise, myalgia) precede a dry cough and dyspnoea. Extra-pulmonary features in-
clude anorexia, D&V, hepatitis, renal failure, confusion, and coma. CXR shows bi-basal 
consolidation. Blood tests may show lymphopenia, hyponatraemia, and deranged 
LFTS. Urinalysis may show haematuria. Diagnosis: Urine antigen/culture. Treatment: 
ﬂ uoroquinolone for 2–3wks or clarithromycin (p387). 10% mortality.
Chlamydophila pneumoniae The commonest chlamydial infection.  Person-to-per-
son spread, biphasic illness: pharyngitis, hoarseness, otitis, followed by pneumonia. 
Diagnosis: Chlamydophila complement ﬁ xation test, PCR invasive samples. 7 Treat-
ment: Doxycycline or clarithromycin. Chlamydophila psittaci Causes psittacosis, 
an  ornithosis  acquired  from  infected  birds  (typically  parrots).  Symptoms  include 
headache, fever, dry cough, lethargy, arthralgia, anorexia, and D&V. Extra-pulmonary 
features are legion but rare, eg meningo-encephalitis, infective endocarditis, hepati-
tis, nephritis, rash, splenomegaly. CXR shows patchy consolidation. Diagnosis: Chla-
mydophila serology. Treatment: doxycycline or clarithromycin.
Viral pneumonia Inﬂ uenza commonest (p396 and BOX), but ‘swine ﬂ u’ (H1N1) is now 
considered seasonal and covered by the annual ‘ﬂ u vaccine. Others: measles, CMV, 
varicella zoster.
Pneumocystis pneumonia Causes pneumonia in the immunosuppressed (eg HIV). 
The  organism  responsible  was  previously  called  Pneumocystis  carinii,  and  now 
called Pneumocystis jirovecii. 8 It presents with a dry cough, exertional dyspnoea, 
PaO2, fever, bilateral crepitations.  CXR may be normal or show bilateral perihilar 
interstitial shadowing. Diagnosis: Visualization of the organism in induced sputum, 
bronchoalveolar lavage, or in a lung biopsy specimen. Drugs: High-dose co-trimox-
azole (pp400–1), or pentamidine by slow IVI for 2–3 weeks (p401). Steroids are bene-
ﬁ cial if severe hypoxaemia. Prophyl axis is indicated if the CD4 count is <200≈106/L or 
after the 1st attack. 9

_OHCM_10e.indb   168

_OHCM_10e.indb   168

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Avian inﬂ uenza
Avian inﬂ uenza  A viruses rarely infect humans and most follow direct or close 
contact with infected poultry. The issue remains a public health priority because 
of the ability of the virus to mutate. Symptoms range from conjunctivitis to inﬂ u-
enza-like illness (low pathogenic forms) to severe respiratory illness and multi-
organ failure (highly pathogenic forms). H7N9 and H5N1 have been responsible for 
most human illnesses worldwide. Suspect avian ﬂ u if fever (>38°C), chest signs 
or consolidation on CXR, or life-threatening infection, and contact with poultry or 
others with similar symptoms.10 NB: D&V, abdominal pain, pleuritic pain, and bleed-
ing from the nose and gums are reported to be an early feature in some patients. 11
Diagnosis: Viral culture ± reverse transcriptase-PCR with H5 & N1 speciﬁ c primers. 12 
Management: Get help. Contain the outbreak,2 p397, in the UK, via your consult-
ant in communicable disease control.13 Ventilatory support + O2 and antivirals may 
be needed. Most viruses are susceptible to oseltamivir, peramivir, and zanamivir. 
Nebulizers and high-air ﬂ ow O2 masks are implicated in nosocomial spread. 11,14
Precautions for close contacts of infected patients:
Hand hygiene, avoid shared utensils and face-to-face contact, wear high-effi  ciency 
masks and eye protection. Start empirical antiviral treatment (oseltamivir within 
48 hours of exposure and zanamivir within 36 hours). Monitor for fever, cough, 
shortness of breath, diarrhoea, or other systemic symptoms developing.

169

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Coronaviruses: SARS and MERS
Severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS15)  is  caused  by  SARS-COV  virus—a 
corona virus. Major features are persistent fever (>38°C), chills, rigors, myalgia, 
dry cough, headache, diarrhoea, and dyspnoea—with an abnormal CXR and WCC. 
Respiratory failure is a complicating feature: ~20% progress to acute respiratory 
distress  syndrome  requiring  invasive  ventilation. 16  Mortality  is  1–50%,  depend-
ing  on  age,  but  no  cases  since  2004.  Close  contacts,  or  travel  to  an  area  with 
known cases should raise suspicion. The mechanism of transmission of SARS-CoV is 
human–human.  Management:  seek  expert  help.  Largely  supportive  with  good 
infection control measures.
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory disease caused 
by novel coronavirus (MERS CoV) and was ﬁ rst identiﬁ ed in 2012 in Saudi Arabia. 
Symptoms include fever, cough, shortness of breath, and gastrointestinal upset. 
Incubation period 14 days. Human-to-human transmission has been reported in 
most cases, but camels play a pivotal host role in animal-to-human transmission. 
Large outbreaks linked to healthcare facilities have been reported in the Middle 
East and South Korea. The World Health Organization has reported mortality as 
high as 36% in known cases.13

2  Therapeutic or prophylactic antivirals are said to be the most eff ective single intervention followed by 
vaccine and basic public health measures. 17 But oseltamivir resistance and unavailability of a suitable vac-
cine during the early stages of a pandemic make non-drug interventions all the more important.

_OHCM_10e.indb   169

_OHCM_10e.indb   169

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
170

Complications of pneumonia

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Respiratory failure (See p188.) Type I respiratory failure (PaO2 <8kPa) is relatively 
common. Treatment is with high-ﬂ ow (60%) oxygen. Transfer the patient to ITU if 
hypoxia does not improve with O2 therapy or PaCO2 rises to >6kPa. Be careful with 
O2 in COPD patients; check ABGS frequently, and consider elective ventilation if rising 
PaCO2 or worsening acidosis. Aim to keep SaO2 at 94–98%, PaO2 ≥8kPa.
Hypotension May be due to a combination of dehydration and vasodilation due 
to sepsis. If systolic BP is <90mmHg, give an intravenous ﬂ uid challenge of 250mL 
colloid/crystalloid over 15min. If BP does not rise, consider a central line and give IV 
ﬂ uids to maintain the systolic BP >90mmHg. If systolic BP remains <90mmHg despite 
ﬂ uid therapy, request ITU assessment for inotropic support.
Atrial ﬁ brillation (p130.) Common in the elderly. It usually resolves with treatment 
of the pneumonia. -blocker or digoxin may be required to slow the ventricular re-
sponse rate in the short term.
Pleural eff  usion Inﬂ ammation of the pleura by adjacent pneumonia may cause ﬂ uid 
exudation into the pleural space. If this accumulates faster than it is reabsorbed, a 
pleural eff usion develops. If small, it may be of no consequence. If larger and patient 
symptomatic, or infected (empyema), drainage is required (p192, p766).
Empyema Pus in the pleural space. It should be suspected if a patient with a resolv-
ing pneumonia develops a recurrent fever. Clinical features: CXR indicates a pleural 
eff usion. The aspirated pleural ﬂ uid is typically yellow and turbid with a pH <7.2, 
glucose, and LDH. The empyema should be drained using a chest drain, inserted 
under radiological guidance. Adhesions and loculation can make this diffi  cult.
Lung abscess A cavitating area of localized, suppurative infection within the lung 
(see ﬁ g 4.6).
Causes: •Inadequately treated pneumonia. •Aspiration (eg alcoholism, oesoph ageal 
obstruction, bulbar palsy). •Bronchial obstruction (tumour, foreign body). •Pulmo-
nary infarction. •Septic emboli (septicaemia, right heart endocarditis, IV drug use). 
•Subphrenic or hepatic abscess.
Clinical features: Swinging fever; cough; purulent, foul-smelling sputum; pleuritic 
chest pain; haemoptysis; malaise; weight loss. Look for: ﬁ nger clubbing; anaemia; 
crepitations. Empyema develops in 20–30%.
Tests: Blood: FBC (anaemia, neutrophilia), ESR, CRP, blood cultures. Sputum micros-
copy, culture, and cytology. CXR: walled cavity, often with a ﬂ uid level. Consider CT 
scan to exclude obstruction, and bronchoscopy to obtain diag nostic specimens.
Treatment: Antibiotics as indicated by sensitivities; continue until healed (4–6 wks). 
Postural drainage. Repeated aspiration, antibiotic instillation, or surgical excision 
may be required.
Septicaemia May occur as a result of bacterial spread from the lung parenchyma 
into the bloodstream. This may cause metastatic infection, eg infective endo carditis, 
meningitis. Treat with IV antibiotic according to sensitivities.
Pericarditis and myocarditis May also complicate pneumonia.
Jaundice This is usually cholestatic, and may be due to sepsis or secondary to anti-
biotic therapy (particularly ﬂ ucloxacillin and co-amoxiclav).

_OHCM_10e.indb   170

_OHCM_10e.indb   170

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
171

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.6  PA chest radiograph showing multiple rounded ring lesions of diff ering sizes in the right 
lower zone, at the right apex, and in the left lower zone. The lesions are largest in the right low-
er zone, where they can be seen to contain air-ﬂ uid levels, typical appearance of infection in a 
pneumatocele (=air cyst) or cavitating lesion. A moderate right-sided hydropneumothorax can also 
be seen, suggesting that one of these lesions may have ruptured into the pleural cavity. The patient 
also has a right subclavian central venous catheter for the administration of antibiotics. The diag-
nosis in this case was that of multiple pulmonary abscesses in a patient who was an intravenous 
drug user.

Image courtesy of Derby Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   171

_OHCM_10e.indb   171

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
172

Bronchiectasis

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Pathology Chronic inﬂ ammation of the bronchi and bronchioles leading to perma-
nent dilatation and thinning of these airways.18 Main organisms: H. inﬂ uenzae; Strep. 
pneumoniae; Staph. aureus; Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Causes Congenital: Cystic ﬁ brosis (CF); Young’s syndrome; primary ciliary dyskinesia; 
Kartagener’s syndrome (OHCS p646). Post-infection: Measles; pertussis; bronchiolitis; 
pneumonia;  TB;  HIV.  Other:  Bronchial  obstruction  (tumour,  foreign  body);  allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA, p177); hypogammaglobulinaemia; rheumatoid 
arthritis; ulcerative colitis; idiopathic.
Clinical features Symptoms: Persistent cough; copious purulent sputum; intermit-
tent haemoptysis. Signs: Finger clubbing; coarse inspiratory crepitations; wheeze 
(asthma, COPD, ABPA). Complications: Pneumonia, pleural eff usion; pneumothorax; 
haemoptysis; cerebral abscess; amyloidosis.
Tests Sputum culture. CXR: Cystic shadows, thickened bronchial walls (tramline and 
ring shadows); see ﬁ g 4.7.  HRCT  chest (p164) to assess extent and distribution of 
disease. Spirometry often shows an obstructive pattern; reversibility should be as-
sessed. Bronchoscopy to locate site of haemoptysis, exclude obstruction and obtain 
samples for culture. Other tests: Serum immunoglobulins; CF sweat test; Aspergillus 
precipitins or skin-prick test RAST and total IgE.
Management  •Airway  clearance  techniques  and  mucolytics.  Chest  physi-
otherapy  and  devices  such  as  a  ﬂ utter  valve  may  aid  sputum  expectoration  and 
mucus drainage. •Antibiotics should be prescribed according to bacterial sensitivi-
ties. Patients known to culture Pseudomonas will require either oral ciproﬂ oxacin 
or suitable IV antibiotics. If ≥3 exacerbations a year consider long-term antibiotics 
(may be nebulized). •Bronchodilators (eg nebulized salbutamol) may be useful in 
patients with asthma, COPD, CF, ABPA (p177). •Corticosteroids (eg prednisolone) and 
itraconazole for ABPA. •Surgery may be indicated in localized disease or to control 
severe haemoptysis.

Fig 4.7  PA chest radiograph showing marked abnormal dilatation of the airways throughout the 
right upper lobe, subtle similar changes throughout the rest of the lung (particulalry periphery of 
the left upper zone). The ﬁ ne background reticular pattern in the lungs suggests that there may 
also be some interstitial lung disease present.

Image courtesy of Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   172

_OHCM_10e.indb   172

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
173

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Cystic ﬁ brosis (CF)

One of the commonest life-threatening autosomal recessive conditions (1:2000 live 
births) aff ecting Caucasians. 1:25 people carry a copy of the faulty gene. All UK babies 
are screened at birth. Caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) gene on chromosome 7 (>1500 mutations have been identiﬁ ed). This 
is a ClΩ channel, and the defect leads to a combination of defective chloride secretion 
and increased sodium absorption across airway epithelium. The changes in the com-
position of airway surface liquid predispose the lung to chronic pulmonary infections 
and bronchiectasis. See OHCS (‘Paediatrics’, p162) for more detail.
Clinical  features  Neonate:  Failure  to  thrive;  meconium  ileus;  rectal  prolapse.
Children  and  young  adults:  Respiratory:  cough;  wheeze;  recurrent  infections; 
bronchiectasis;  pneumothorax;  haemoptysis;  respiratory  failure;  cor  pulmonale. 
Gastrointestinal: pancreatic insuffi  ciency (diabetes mellitus, steatorrhoea); distal 
intestinal obstruction syndrome (meconium ileus equivalent); gallstones; cirrhosis. 
Other: male infertility; osteoporosis; arthritis; vasculitis (p556); nasal polyps; sinusi-
tis;  and  hypertrophic  pulmonary  osteoarthropathy  (HPOA).  Signs:  cyanosis;  ﬁ nger 
clubbing; bilateral coarse crackles.
Diagnosis  Sweat  test:  Sweat  sodium  and  chloride  >60mmol/L;  chloride  usu-
ally > sodium. Genetics: Screening for known common CF mutations should be con-
sidered. Faecal elastase is a simple and useful screening test for exocrine pancreatic 
dysfunction.
Tests Blood: FBC, U&E, LFT; clotting; vitamin A, D, E levels; annual glucose tolerance test 
(p206). Bacteriology: Cough swab, sputum culture. Radiology: CXR; hyper inﬂ ation; 
bronchiectasis. Abdominal ultrasound: Fatty liver; cirrhosis; chronic pancreatitis; 
Spirometry: Obstructive defect. Aspergillus serology/skin test (20% develop ABPA, 
p177). Biochemistry: Faecal fat analysis.
Management  Management  should  be  multidisciplinary,  eg  physician,  GP,  physi-
otherapist,  specialist  nurse,  and  dietician,  with  attention  to  psychosocial  as  well 
as  physical wellbeing. Chest:  Physiotherapy (postural drainage, airway clearance 
techniques). Antibiotics are given for acute infective exacerbations and prophylacti-
cally. Chronic Pseudomonas infection is an important predictor of survival. Muco-
lytics may be useful (eg DNase, ie Dornase alfa, 2.5mg daily nebulized, or nebulized 
hypertonic saline). Bronchodilators. Annual CXR surveillance is recommended. Gas-
trointestinal: Malabsorption, GORD, distal obstruction syndrome. Pancreatic enzyme 
replacement;  fat-soluble  vitamin  supp lements  (A,  D,  E,  K);  ursodeoxycholic  acid  for 
impaired liver function; cirrhosis may require liver transplantation. Other: Treatment 
of  CF-related diabetes (screen annually with  OGTT from 12yrs); screening/treatment 
of osteoporosis (DEXA bone scanning); arthritis, sinusitis, and vasculitis; fertility and 
genetic counselling. Advanced lung disease: Oxygen, diuretics (cor pulmonale); non-
invasive  ventilation;  lung  or  heart/lung  transplantation  (post-transplant  survival 
5 years). Prognosis: Median survival is now ~ 41yrs in the UK, although a baby born 
today would expect to live longer.

Mutation-speciﬁ c therapies for cystic ﬁ brosis
Ivacaftor and lumacaftor target the CFTR protein. Ivacaftor, a CFTR potentiator, 
targets gating defects in disease causing CFTR mutations including G551D. Ivacaftor 
increases the open probability of CFTR channels and has been shown to improve 
clinical outcomes (lung function, weight, lung disease stability) in CF patients >6 
years old.19 Lumacaftor is a CFTR corrector, and has been shown to correct F508 
del CFTR misprocessing and increase the amount of cell surface–localized protein. 
Ivacaftor and lumacaftor combination therapy, for patients with F508 del, have 
shown improved lung function and reduced pulmonary exacerations.20

Gene  therapy  (transfer  of  CFTR  gene  using  liposome  or  adenovirus  vectors): 
phase 2b studies show modest but signiﬁ cant improvement in FEV1 in those receiv-
ing gene therapy.21 Further work into vectors for gene transfer is ongoing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   173

_OHCM_10e.indb   173

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
174

Lung tumours

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Carcinoma of the bronchus Second most common cancer in the UK, accounting 
for 13% of all new cancer cases and 27% of cancer deaths (40 000 cases/yr in UK).22 
Incidence is increasing in women. Only 5% ‘cured’. Risk factors: Cigarette smoking 
(causes 90% of lung ca).  Others: passive smoking, asbestos, chromium, arsenic, iron 
oxides, and radiation (radon gas).
Histology:  Clinically the most important division is between small cell (SCLC) and 
non-small  cell  (NSCLC).  NSCLC:  Squamous  (35%);  adenocarcinoma  (27%),  large  cell 
(10%); adenocarcinoma in situ (rare, <1%). Small cell (oat cell) (20%): Arise from 
endocrine cells (Kulchitsky cells), often secreting polypeptide hormones resulting in 
paraneoplastic syndromes (eg production of ACTH, Cushing’s syndrome). Most (70%) 
SCLC are disseminated at presentation.
Symptoms: Cough (80%); haemoptysis (70%); dyspnoea (60%); chest pain (40%); 
recurrent or slowly resolving pneumonia; lethargy, anorexia; weight loss. 
Signs: Cachexia; anaemia; clubbing; HPOA (hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropa-
thy, causing wrist pain); supraclavicular or axillary nodes. Chest signs: none, or con-
solidation; col lapse; pleural eff usion. Metastases: bone tenderness; hepatomegaly; 
confusion; ﬁ ts; focal CNS signs; cerebellar syndrome; proximal myopathy; peripheral 
neuropathy.
Complications:  Local:  recurrent  laryngeal  nerve  palsy;  phrenic  nerve  palsy;  SVC 
obstruction;  Horner’s  syndrome  (Pancoast’s  tumour);  rib  erosion;  pericarditis;  AF. 
Metastatic: brain; bone (bone pain, anaemia, Ca2+); liver; adrenals (Addison’s). Non-
metastatic neurological: confusion; ﬁ ts; cerebellar syndrome; proximal myopathy; 
neuropathy; polymyositis; Lambert–Eaton syndrome (p512). See table 4.3.
Tests:  CXR:  peripheral  nodule  (ﬁ g  4.8);  hilar  enlargement;  consolidation;  lung  col-
lapse; pleu ral eff usion; bony secondaries. Cytology: sputum and pleural ﬂ uid (send 
at least 20mL). Fine needle aspiration or biopsy (peripheral lesions/lymph nodes). 
CT to stage the tumour (p176) and guide bronchoscopy.  Bronch oscopy: to give histol-
ogy and assess operability, ± endobronchial ultrasound for assessment and biopsy. 
18F-deoxyglucose PET or PET/CT EBUS scan to help in staging. Radionuclide bone scan: 
if suspected metastases. Lung function tests: help assess suitability for lobectomy.
Other lung tumours Bronchial adenoma: Rare, slow-growing. 90% are carcinoid 
tumours; 10% cylindromas. : surgery. Hamartoma: Rare, benign; CT: lobulated mass 
± ﬂ ecks of calciﬁ cation; ?excise to exclude malignancy.
Malignant mesothelioma A tumour of mesothelial cells that usually occurs in the 
pleura, and rarely in the peritoneum or other organs. It is associated with occupa-
tional exposure to asbestos but the relationship is complex. 23 90% report previous 
exposure to asbestos, but only 20% of patients have pulmonary asbestosis. The la-
tent period between exposure and development of the tumour may be up to 45yrs. 
Compensation is often available.
Clinical features: Chest pain, dyspnoea, weight loss, ﬁ nger clubbing, recurrent pleu-
ral eff usions. Signs of metastases: lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, bone pain/ten-
derness, abdominal pain/obstr uction (peritoneal malignant mesothelioma).
Tests: CXR/CT: pleural thickening/eff usion. Bloody pleural ﬂ uid.
Diagnosis: Made on histology, usually following a thoracoscopy. Often the diagnosis 
is only made post-mortem.
Management: Pemetrexed + cisplatin chemotherapy can improve survival. 24 Surgery 
is hard to evaluate (few randomized trials). Radiotherapy is controversial. Pleurodesis 
and indwelling intra-pleural drain may help.
Prognosis: Poor (especially without pemetrexed, eg <2yrs). >650 deaths/yr in UK.

_OHCM_10e.indb   174

_OHCM_10e.indb   174

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Diff  erential diagnosis of nodule in the lung on a CXR
  • Malignancy (1° or 2°) 
  • Abscesses (p170) 
  • Granuloma  
  • Carcinoid tumour 
  • Pulmonary hamartoma 

• Arterio-venous malformation
• Encysted eff usion (ﬂ uid, blood, pus)
• Cyst
• Foreign body
• Skin tumour (eg seborrhoeic wart).

175

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.8  A wedge-shaped density in the right middle lobe. Also note a coin lesion at the right 
costophrenic angle. Right hilar lymphadenopathy.

Courtesy of Janet E. Jeddry, Yale Medical School.

Table 4.3  Non-metastatic extrapulmonary manifestations of bronchial cancer
System
Endocrine

Manifestations
Ectopic secretion; ACTH (Cushing’s), ADH (dilutional hyponatraemia), PTH 
(hypercalcaemia), HCG (gynaecomastia)
Cerebellar degeneration, myopathy, polyneuropathy, myasthenic 
syndrome
Thrombophlebitis migrans (p562), anaemia, DIC
Dermatomyositis, herpes zoster, acanthosis nigricans
Clubbing, HPOA

Neurological

Vascular
Cutaneous
Skeletal

_OHCM_10e.indb   175

_OHCM_10e.indb   175

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
176

Lung tumours: staging and treatment

Assessing the extent of tumour spread (staging) is vital to determining the best 
course of treatment and also prognosis. All patients who may be suitable for surgery 
with curative intent should be off ered PET-CT before treatment.25 Some patients may 
undergo endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspirations for me-
diastinal masses. TNM staging classiﬁ cation for non-small cell lung cancer is shown 
in table 4.4. You do not need to memorize this!
Table 4.4  TNM staging for non-small cell lung cancer

Primary tumour (T)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

TX

TIS

T0

T1

T2

T3

T4

Malignant cells in bronchial secretions, no other evidence of tumour
Carcinoma in situ
None evident
≤ 3cm, in lobar or more distal airway
>3cm and >2cm distal to carina or any size if pleural involvement or obstruc-
tive pneumonitis extending to hilum, but not all the lung
Involves the chest wall, diaphragm, mediastinal pleura, pericardium, or <2cm 
from, but not at, carina. T >7cm diameter and nodules in same lobe
Involves mediastinum, heart, great ves sels, trachea, oesophagus, vertebral 
body, carina, malignant eff usion, or nodules in another lobe

Regional nodes (N)

N0

N1

N2

None involved (after mediastinoscopy)
Peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilum
Ipsilateral mediastinum or subcarinal
Contralateral mediastinum or hilum, scalene, or supraclavicular

N3
Distant metastasis (M)
None
a) Nodule in other lung, pleural lesions, or malignant eff usion; b) distant 
metastases present

M0

M1

Stages
Occult 

I 

II 

TX N0 M0 

TIS/T1/T2 N0 M0 

 T1/T2 N1 M0 
or T3 N0 M0 

IIIa 

IIIb 
 T1–4 N3 M0 
or T1–3 N2 M0  or T4 N0–2 M0

 T3 N1 M0 

IV
T1–4 N0–3 M1

Reproduced with permission from Edge, SB et al. (Eds.), AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th Edition. 
New York: Springer; 2010.
Treatment NSCLC: Lobectomy (open or thoracoscopic) is the treatment of choice 
if medically ﬁ t and aim is curative intent or parenchymal sparing operation for pa-
tients with borderline ﬁ tness and smaller tumours ((T1a–b, N0, M0). Radical radio-
therapy for patient with stage I, II, III NSCLC. Chemotherapy ± radiotherapy for more 
advanced disease. Regimens may be platinum based, eg with monoclonal antibodies 
targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor (cetuximab). SCLC: consider sur-
gery with limited stage disease. Chemotherapy ± radiotherapy if well enough. Palli-
ation: Radiotherapy is used for bronchial obstruction, SVC obstr uction, haemoptysis, 
bone pain, and cerebral metastases. SVC stent + radio therapy and dexamethasone 
for SVC obstruction. Endo bronchial therapy: tracheal stenting, cryotherapy, laser, 
brachytherapy (radioactive source is placed close to the tumour). Pleural drainage/
pleurodesis  for  symptomatic  pleural  eff usions.  Drugs:  analgesia;  steroids;  anti-
emetics; cough linctus; bronchodilators; antidepressants.
Prognosis Non-small cell: 50% 2yr survival without spread; 10% with spread. Small 
cell: median survival is 3 months if untreated; 1–1½yrs if treated.
Prevention Stop smoking (p93). Prevent occupational exposure to carcinogens.

_OHCM_10e.indb   176

_OHCM_10e.indb   176

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
177

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fungi and the lung

Aspergillus This group of fungi aff ects the lung in ﬁ ve ways:

1      Asthma: Type I hypersensitivity reaction to fungal spores (p178).
2      Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA): Results from type  I and  III 
hypersensitivity reactions to Aspergillus fumigatus. Aff ects 1–5% of asthmat-
ics, 2–25% of CF patients.26 Initially bronchoconstriction, then permanent dam-
age occurs causing bronchiectasis (ﬁ g 4.9). Symptoms: wheeze, cough, sputum 
(plugs of mucus containing fungal hyphae, see p408), dyspnoea, and ‘recurrent 
pneumonia’.  Investigations:  CXR  (transient  segmental  collapse  or  consolida-
tion, bronchiectasis); Aspergillus in sputum; positive Aspergillus skin test and/
or Aspergillus-speciﬁ c IgE RAST (radioallergosorbent test); positive serum pre-
cipitins;  eosinophilia;  raised  serum  IgE.  Treatment:  prednisolone  30–40mg/24h 
PO for acute attacks; maintenance dose 5–10mg/d. Itraconazole can be used in 
combination with corticosteroids. Bronchodilators for asthma. Sometimes bron-
choscopic aspiration of mucus plugs is needed.

3      Aspergilloma  (mycetoma):  A  fungus  ball  within  a  pre-existing  cavity  (often 
caused by TB or sarcoidosis). It is usually asymptomatic but may cause cough, 
haemoptysis  (may  be  torrential),  lethargy  ±  weight  loss.  Investigations:  CXR 
(round  opacity  within  a  cavity,  usually  apical);  sputum  culture;  strongly  posi-
tive serum precipitins; Aspergillus skin test (30% +ve). Treatment (only if symp-
tomatic): consider surgical excision for solitary symptomatic lesions or severe 
haemoptysis. Oral itraconazole and other antifungals have been tried with lim-
ited success. Local instillation of amphotericin paste under CT guidance yields 
partial success in carefully selected patients, eg in massive haemoptysis.

4      Invasive aspergillosis: Risk factors: 27 immunocompromise, eg HIV, leukaemia, 
burns, Wegener’s (p714), and SLE, or after broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. In-
vestigations: sputum culture; BAL; biopsy; serum precipitins; CXR (consolidation, 
abscess). Early chest CT and serial serum measurements of galactomannan (an 
Aspergillus antigen) may be helpful. Diagnosis may only be made at lung biopsy 
or autopsy. Treatment: voriconazole is superior to  IV amphotericin. 28 Alterna-
tives: IV miconazole or ketoconazole (less eff ective). Prognosis: 30% mortality.

5      Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA): See p198.

Other fungal infections Candida and Cryptococcus may cause pneumonia in the 
immunosuppressed (see p408).

Fig 4.9  Aspergillosis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   177

_OHCM_10e.indb   177

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
178

Asthma

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Asthma aff ects 5–8% of the population. It is characterized by recurrent episodes of 
dyspnoea, cough, and wheeze caused by reversible airways obstruction. Three fac-
tors contribute to airway narrowing: bronchial muscle contraction, triggered by a 
variety of stimuli; mucosal swelling/inﬂ ammation, caused by mast cell and basophil 
degranulation  resulting  in  the  release  of  inﬂ ammatory  mediators;  and  increased 
mucus production.
Symptoms Intermittent dyspnoea, wheeze, cough (often nocturnal), and sputum 
(see table 4.5).
Precipitants:  Cold  air,  exercise,  emotion,  allergens  (house  dust  mite,  pollen,  fur), 
infection, smoking and passive smoking,29 pollution, NSAIDS, -blockers.
Diurnal variation Symptoms or peak ﬂ ow may vary over the day. Marked morning 
dipping of peak ﬂ ow is common and can tip the balance into a serious attack, despite 
having normal peak ﬂ ow (ﬁ g 4.12) at other times.
Exercise: Quantify the exercise tolerance.
Disturbed sleep: Quantify as nights per week (a sign of severe asthma).
Acid reﬂ ux: 40–60% of those with asthma have reﬂ ux; treating it improves spirom-
etry, but not necessarily symptoms. 30
Other atopic disease: Eczema, hay fever, allergy, or family history?
The home (especially the bedroom): Pets? Carpet? Feather pillows or duvet? Floor 
cushions and other ‘soft furnishings’?
Job: If symptoms remit at weekends or holidays, work may provide the trigger (15% 
of cases are work-related—more for paint sprayers, food processors, welders, and 
animal handlers). 31 Ask the patient to measure their peak ﬂ ow at intervals at work 
and at home (at the same time of day) to conﬁ rm this (see ﬁ g 4.13).
Days per week off work or school.
Signs  Tachypnoea;  audible  wheeze;  hyperinﬂ ated  chest;  hyper-resonant  percus-
sion note; air entry; widespread, polyphonic wheeze. Severe attack: Inability to 
complete sentences; pulse >110bpm; respiratory rate >25/min; PEF 33–50% predicted. 
Life-threatening attack: Silent chest; confusion; exhaustion; cyanosis (PaO2 <8kPa 
but PaCO2 4.6–6.0, SpO2 <92%); brady cardia; PEF <33% predicted. Near fatal: PaCO2.
Tests Initial diagnosis: See ﬁ gs 4.10, 4.11. Acute attack: PEF, sputum culture, FBC, 
U&E, CRP, blood cultures. ABG analysis usually shows a normal or slightly PaO2 but 
PaCO2 (hyperventilation). If PaO2 is normal but the patient is hyperventilating, watch 
carefully and repeat the ABG a little later. If PaCO2 is normal or raised, transfer 
to high-dependency unit or  ITU for ventilation, as this signiﬁ es failing respiratory 
eff ort. CXR (to exclude infection or pneumothorax). Chronic asthma: PEF monitoring 
(p162): a diurnal variation of >20% on ≥3d a wk for 2wks. Spirometry: obstructive 
defect (FEV1/FVC, RV p162); usually ≥15% improvement in FEV1 following 2 agonists 
or steroid trial. CXR: hyperinﬂ ation. Skin-prick tests may help to identify allergens. 
Histamine or methacholine challenge. Aspergillus serology.
Diff  erential diagnosis Pulmonary oedema (‘cardiac asthma’); COPD (may co-exist); 
large airway obstruction (eg foreign body, tumour); SVC obstruction (wheeze/dys-
pnoea  not  episodic);  pneumothorax;  PE;  bronchiectasis;  obliterative  bronchiolitis 
(suspect in elderly).
Treatment Chronic asthma (p182). Emergency treatment (p810).
Associated diseases Acid reﬂ ux; polyarteritis nodosa (PAN, p556); Churg–Strauss 
syndrome (p696); ABPA (p177).
Natural  history  Most  childhood  asthmatics  (see  OHCS  p164)  either  grow  out  of 
asthma in adolescence or suff er much less as adults. A signiﬁ cant number of people 
develop chronic asthma late in life.
Mortality ~900 asthma deaths in the UK in 2012, 50% were >65yrs old.

_OHCM_10e.indb   178

_OHCM_10e.indb   178

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Table 4.5  Clinical features which increase or decrease probability of asthma in adults.

Increase probability of asthma
Wheeze, SOB, chest tightness

Diurnal variation
Response to exercise, allergen, cold air
Symptoms after aspirin or -blocker

Lower probability of asthma
Prominent dizziness, lightheadedness, 
tingling
Chronic productive cough with no wheeze
Normal examination when symptomatic
Change in voice

History of atopy

Symptoms with colds only

Family history atopy/asthma

Signiﬁ cant smoking history (>20 pack year)

Widespread wheeze heard on auscultation Cardiac disease

Unexplained low FEV1 or PEF

Normal PEF when symptomatic

Unexplained peripheral blood eosinophilia

(Data from  https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/document-library/clinical-information/asthma/btsign-asthma-guideline-quick-
reference-guide-2014)

179

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

_OHCM_10e.indb   179

_OHCM_10e.indb   179

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
180

Suspected asthma in children

High probability

Intermediate
probability

Low probability

Trial of asthma 
treatment

+

Consider lung func-
tion tests/atopy

Ω

Consider referral
Investigate/treat 
other cause

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

If successful, continue 
minimum eff ective dose. 
If unsuccessful, assess 
inhaler technique/
compliance

If no further improvement, 
consider onward referral

If no response to 
treatment, consider 
further investigation or 
onward referral

Fig 4.10  BTS/SIGN British guideline on the management of asthma in children.

Data from Fig 1, p21:  https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/document-library/clinical-information/asthma/btssign-asthma-
guideline-2014/

Suspected asthma in adults

Clinical investigation (spirometry or peak expiratory 
ﬂ ow if spirometry not available)

High probability

Intermediate 
probability

Low probability

Trial of asthma 
treatment

FEV1 /FVC
<0.7

FEV1 /FVC
>0.7

Investigate or 
treat other cause

If successful, continue 
minimum eff ective dose. 
If unsuccessful, assess 
inhaler technique/
compliance

If no further improvement, 
consider onward referral

Consider referral/ 
treat other cause

If no response to 
treatment, consider 
further investigation or 
onward referral

Fig 4.11  BTS/SIGN British guideline on the management of asthma in adults.
Data from Fig 2, p25:  https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/document-library/clinical-information/asthma/btssign-
asthma-guideline-2014/

_OHCM_10e.indb   180

_OHCM_10e.indb   180

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
181

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.12  Normal peak expiratory ﬂ ow (PEF).

Data from Nunn, AJ, Gregg, I. New regression equations for predicting peak expiratory ﬂ ow in adults. BMJ 
1989;298:1068–70.

Fig 4.13  Examples of serial peak ﬂ ow charts.

_OHCM_10e.indb   181

_OHCM_10e.indb   181

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
182

Management of chronic asthma

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Lifestyle Help to quit smoking (p93). Avoid precipitants. Weight loss if overweight. 
Check inhaler technique. Teach use of a peak ﬂ ow meter to monitor  PEF twice a 
day. Educate to enable self-management by altering their medication in the light of 
symptoms or PEF. Give speciﬁ c advice about what to do in an emergency; provide 
a written action plan. Consider teaching relaxed breathing to avoid dysfunctional 
breathing 32 (Papworth method).3
British  Thoracic  Society  guidelines (BTS33)  Start  at  the  step  most  appropriate 
to severity; moving up if needed, or down if control is good for >3 months. Rescue 
courses of prednisolone may be used at any time. For drug examples see table 4.6.
  • Step 1: Occasional short-acting inhaled 2-agonist as required for symptom relief. 

If used more than once daily, or night-time symptoms, go to Step 2.

  • Step 2: Add standard-dose inhaled steroid, eg beclometasone 200–800mcg/day, or 

start at the dose appropriate for disease severity, and titrate as required.

  • Step 3: Add long-acting 2-agonist (eg salmeterol 50mcg/12h by inhaler). If bene-
ﬁ t—but still inadequate control—continue and dose of beclometasone to 800mcg/
day. If no eff ect then stop LABA and dose of beclometasone to 800mcg/day. Leu-
kotriene receptor antagonist or oral theophylline may be tried.

  • Step 4: Consider trials of: beclometasone up to 2000mcg/day; modiﬁ ed-release oral 
theophylline; modiﬁ ed-release oral 2-agonist tablets; oral leukotriene receptor an-
tagonist, in conjunction with previous therapy.

  • Step 5: Add regular oral prednisolone (1 dose daily, at the lowest possible dose). 

Continue with high-dose inhaled steroids. Refer for specialist input.

Drugs 2-adrenoceptor agonists: Relax bronchial smooth muscle (CAMP), acting 
within minutes. Salbutamol is best given by inhalation (aerosol, powder, nebulizer), 
but may also be given PO or IV. SE: tachyarrhythmias, K+, tremor, anxiety. Long-act-
ing inhaled 2-agonist (eg salmeterol, formoterol) can help nocturnal symptoms and 
reduce morning dips. They may be an alternative to steroid dose when symptoms 
are uncontrolled; doubts remain over whether they are associated with an increase 
in adverse events. 34 SE: as salbutamol, paradoxical bronchospasm. 35
Corticosteroids: Best inhaled to minimize systemic eff ects, eg beclometasone via 
spacer (or powder), but may be given PO or IV. They act over days to bronchial mu-
cosal inﬂ ammation. Rinse mouth after inhaled steroids to prevent oral candidiasis. 
Oral steroids are used acutely (high-dose, short courses, eg prednisolone 40mg/24h 
PO for 7d) and longer term in lower dose (eg 5–10mg/24h) if control is not optimal on 
inhalers. Warn about SEs: p377.
Aminophylline: (Metabolized to theophylline) acts by inhibiting phospho diesterase, 
thus bronchoconstriction by CAMP levels. Try as prophylaxis, at night, PO, to prevent 
morning dipping. Stick with one brand name (bioavailability variable). Also useful 
as an adjunct if inhaled therapy is inadequate. In acute severe asthma, it may be 
given IVI. It has a narrow therapeutic ratio, causing arrhythmias, GI upset, and ﬁ ts 
in the toxic range. Check theophylline levels (p756), and do ECG monitoring and check 
plasma levels after 24h if IV therapy is used.
Anticholinergics: (Eg ipratropium, tiotropium.) May muscle spasm synergistically 
with 2-agonists but are not recommended in current guidelines for chronic asthma. 
They may be of more beneﬁ t in COPD.
Cromoglicate (Mast cell stabilizer.) May be used as prophylaxis in mild and exercise-
induced asthma (always inhaled), especially in children. It may precipitate asthma.
Leukotriene receptor antagonists: (Eg oral montelukast, zaﬁ rlukast.) Block the ef-
fects of cysteinyl leukotrienes in the airways by antagonizing the CystLT1 receptor.
Anti-IgE  monoclonal  antibody:  Omalizumab 36  may  be  of  use  in  highly  selected 
patients with persistent allergic asthma. Given as a subcutaneous injection every 
2–4 wks depending on dose. Specialists prescribe only.

3  Integrated  breathing  and  relaxation  training  (Papworth  method)  is  psychological  and  physical: 
patients learn to drop their shoulders, relax their abdomen, and breathe calmly and appropriately.

_OHCM_10e.indb   182

_OHCM_10e.indb   182

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Table 4.6  Adult doses of common inhaled drugs used in bronchoconstriction

Inhaled
aerosol

Inhaled
powder

Nebulized
(supervised)

2.5–5mg/6h

100–200mcg/6h

200–400mcg/6h

500mcg 
500mcg/6h

Salbutamol
Dose example:
Airomir® is a CFC-free example
of a breath-actuated inhaler
Terbutaline
Single dose
Recommended regimen
Salmeterol
Dose/puff 
Recommended regimen
Tiotropium bromide (COPD)
Dose/puff 
Recommended regimen
Steroids
(Clenil Modulite®=beclometasone; Pulmicort®=budesonide;* Flixotide®=ﬂ uticasone)
Fluticasone (Flixotide®)
Doses available/puff 

50mcg
50–100mcg/12h

25mcg
50–100mcg/12h

2.5mcg
25mcg daily

9mcg
18mcg daily

As for aerosol

250mcg/mL

2.5mg/mL
5–10mg/6–12h

—
—

—
—

50, 100, 250, & 
500mcg

183

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Recommended regimen

100–250mcg/12h

100–250mcg/12h
max 1mg/12h

0.5–2mg/12h

Clenil Modulite®
Doses available/puff 

Recommended regimen

50 & 100mcg
250mcg
200mcg/12h
then
400mcg/12h
then
1000mcg/12h

—

—

*Available as a Turbohaler®; Autohalers® are an alternative (breath-actuated) and don’t need breathing 
coordination, eg Airomir® (salbutamol) and Qvar® (beclometasone). Accuhalers® deliver dry powders 
(eg Flixotide®, Serevent®).
Systemic absorption (via the throat) is less if inhalation is through a large-volume device, eg Volumatic® or 
AeroChamber Plus® devices. The latter is more compact. Static charge on some devices reduces dose deliv-
ery, so wash in water before dose; leave to dry (don’t rub). It’s pointless to squirt many puff s into a device: 
it is best to repeat single doses, and be sure to inhale as soon as the drug is in the spacer. SE: local (oral) 
candidiasis (p377); rate of cataract if lifetime dose ≥2g beclometasone. 37

Prescribe beclometasone by brand name, and state that a CFC-free inhaler should 
be dispensed. This is because, dose for dose, Qvar® is twice as potent as the other 
available CFC-free brand (Clenil Modulite®).
Any dose ≥250mcg ≈ signiﬁ cant steroid absorption: carry a steroid card; this recom-
mendation is being widened, and lower doses (beclometasone) are now said to merit 
a steroid card (manufacturer’s information).

_OHCM_10e.indb   183

_OHCM_10e.indb   183

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
184

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Deﬁ nitions  COPD  is  a  common  progressive  disorder  characterized  by  airway  ob-
struction (FEV1 <80% predicted; FEV1/FVC <0.7; see p162 and table 4.5) with little or no 
reversibility. It includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Usually patients have 
either COPD or asthma, not both: COPD is favoured by: •age of onset >35yrs •smok-
ing (passive or active) or pollution related38 •chronic dyspnoea •sputum production 
•minimal diurnal or day-to-day FEV1 variat ion. Chronic bronchitis is deﬁ ned clini-
cally as cough, sputum production on most days for 3 months of 2 successive yrs. 
Symptoms improve if they stop smoking. There is no excess mortality if lung func-
tion is normal. Emphysema is deﬁ ned histologically as enlarged air spaces distal to 
terminal bronchioles, with destruction of alveolar walls but often visualized on CT.
Prevalence 10–20% of the over-40s; 2.5≈106 deaths/yr worldwide. 39
Pink puff  ers and blue bloaters A traditional division but likely ends of a spec-
trum. Pink puffers: Have alveolar ventilation, a near normal PaO2 and a normal or 
low PaCO2. They are breathless but are not cyanosed. They may progress to type I 
respiratory failure (p188). Blue bloaters: Have alveolar ventilation, with a low PaO2 
and a high PaCO2. They are cyanosed but not breathless and may go on to develop 
cor pulmonale. Their respiratory centres are relatively insensitive to CO2 and they 
rely on hypoxic drive to maintain respiratory eff ort (p188)—supplemental oxygen 
should be given with care.
Symptoms Cough; sputum; dyspnoea; wheeze. Signs Tachypnoea; use of accessory 
muscles  of  respiration;  hyperinﬂ ation;  cricosternal  distance  (<3cm);  expansion; 
resonant or hyperresonant percussion note; quiet breath sounds (eg over bullae); 
wheeze; cyanosis; cor pulmonale.
Complications Acute exacerbations ± infection; polycythaemia; respiratory failure; 
cor pulmonale (oedema; JVP); pneumothorax (ruptured bullae); lung carcinoma.
Tests FBC: PCV. CXR: Hyperinﬂ ation; ﬂ at hemidiaphragms; large central pulmonary 
arteries; peripheral vascular markings; bullae. CT: Bronchial wall thickening; scar-
ring;  air  space  enlargement.  ECG:  Right  atrial  and  ventricular  hyper trophy  (cor 
pulmonale).  ABG: PaO2  ±  hypercapnia.  Spirometry  (p162,  p165):  obstructive  +  air 
trapping (FEV1 <80% of predicted,  FEV1 : FVC ratio <70%, TLC, RV, DLCO in emphy-
sema—see p160). Learn how to do spirometry from an experienced person: ensure 
maximal expiration of the full breath (it takes >4s; it’s not a quick puff  out).
Treatment Chronic stable: see BOX and ﬁ g 4.14; Emergency : p812. Smoking ces-
sation advice with cordial vigour (p93). Encourage exercise: BMI is often low; diet 
advice ± supplements 40 may help (p584). Mucolytics (BNF 3.7) may help chronic pro-
ductive cough (NICE). 41 Disabilities may cause serious, treatable depression; screen 
for this (p15). Respiratory failure: p188. Oedema: diuretics. Flu and pneumococcal 
vaccinations: p167 and p396.
Long-term  O2  therapy  (LTOT):  An  MRC  trial  showed  that  if  PaO2  was  maintained 
≥8.0kPa  for  15h  a  day,  3yr  survival  improved  by  50%.  UK  NICE  guidelines  suggest 
LTOT should be given for: 1 Clinically stable non-smokers with PaO2 <7.3kPa—despite 
maximal . These values should be stable on two occasions >3wks apart. 2 If PaO2 
7.3–8.0 and pulmonary hypertension (eg RVH; loud S2), or polycythaemia, or peripheral 
oedema, or nocturnal hypoxia. 3 O2 can also be prescribed for terminally ill patients.

Severity assessment in COPD
Severity assessment has implications for therapy and prognosis. The BODE index 
(Body  mass  index,  airﬂ ow  Obstruction,  Dyspnoea  and  Exercise  capacity)  helps 
predict  outcome  and  number  and  severity  of  exacerbations.  The  Global  Initia-
tive for COPD (GOLD) categorizes severity of COPD into four stages (mild, moderate, 
severe, and very severe) based on post-bronchodilator FEV1% predicted, but it is 
not useful for predicting total mortality for 3 years of follow-up and onwards.42

_OHCM_10e.indb   184

_OHCM_10e.indb   184

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
185

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

British Thoracic Society (BTS)/NICE COPD guidelines
More advanced COPD

Management of COPD

Initiate short-acting 2-antagonist (SABA)/
short-acting muscarinic antagonist (SAMA)

FEV1 >50%

FEV1 <50%

Long-acting
2-antagonist (LABA)

Long-acting muscarinic 
antagonist (LAMA)*,4

LABA plus inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS) in 
combined inhaler

LABA plus inhaled 
corticosteroid (ICS)

LAMA plus LABA/ICS 
combination inhaler

Fig 4.14  Management of COPD in primary and secondary care.
*Tiotropium  (LAMA)  is  more  eff ective  than  salmeterol  in  preventing  exacerbations  for  patients  with 
moderate-to-very-severe COPD.43
© National  Institute  for  Health  and  Clinical  Excellence  2010.  CG101  Chronic  obstructive  pulmonary 
disease  in  over  16s:  diagnosis  and  management.  Available  from  https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101 .
NICE guidance is prepared for the National Health Service in England. All NICE guidance is subject to 
regular review and may be updated or withdrawn. 

Pulmonary rehabilitation is greatly valued by patients.
  • Consider LTOT if PaO2 <7.3kPa (see ‘Long-term O2 therapy’, earlier in topic OPPOSITE).
  • Surgery may be appropriate in selected patients, eg recurrent pneumothoraces; 
isolated bullous disease. Lung volume reduction/endobronchial valve/transplant.

  • NIV may be appropriate if hypercapnic on LTOT.
  • NB: air travel is risky if FEV1 <50% or PaO2 <6.7kPa on air.
  • Consider palliative care input.
Indications for specialist referral
  • Uncertain diagnosis, or suspected severe COPD, or a rapid decline in FEV1.
  • Onset of cor pulmonale.
  • Bullous lung disease (to assess for surgery).
  • Assessment for oral corticosteroids, nebulizer therapy, or LTOT.
  • <10 pack-years smoking (= the number of packs/day ≈ years of smoking) or COPD 

in patient <40yrs (eg is the cause 1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency? p290).

  • Symptoms disproportionate to lung function tests.
  • Frequent infections (to exclude bronchiectasis).

4  Cochrane meta-analyses (2007) of trials (including TORCH) favour steroids + LABA (long-acting -agonist) 
vs either alone. LABA alone may exacerbation rates, but no excess hospitalizations or mortality; steroid 
inhalers alone are associated with mortality (by 33%) compared with steroids + LABA. 44 Steroid inhalers 
may risk of pneumonia, but when combined with LABA, advantages outweigh disadvantages.

_OHCM_10e.indb   185

_OHCM_10e.indb   185

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
186

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

ARDS, or acute lung injury, may be caused by direct lung injury or occur secondary to 
severe systemic illness. Lung damage and release of inﬂ ammatory mediators cause 
increased capillary permeability and non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, often ac-
companied by multiorgan failure.
Causes  Pulmonary:  Pneumonia;  gastric  aspiration;  inhalation;  injury;  vasculitis 
(p556); contusion. Other: Shock; septicaemia; haemorrhage; multiple transfusions; 
DIC (p352); pancreatitis; acute liver failure; trauma; head injury; malaria; fat embo-
lism; burns; obstetric events (eclampsia; amniotic ﬂ uid embolus); drugs/toxins (as-
pirin, heroin, paraquat).
Clinical features Cyanosis; tachypnoea; tachycardia; peripheral vasodilation; bilat-
eral ﬁ ne inspiratory crackles. Investigations FBC, U&E, LFT, amylase, clotting, CRP, 
blood  cultures,  ABG.  CXR  shows  bilateral  pulmonary  inﬁ ltrates.  Pulmonary  artery 
catheter to measure pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP).
Diagnostic  criteria  One  consensus  requires  these  four  to  exist:45  1  Acute  onset. 
2 CXR: bilateral inﬁ ltrates (ﬁ g 4.15). 3 PCWP <19mmHg or a lack of clinical congestive 
heart failure. 4 Refractory hypoxaemia with PaO2: FiO2 <200 for ARDS. Others include 
total thoracic compliance <30mL/cmH2O.
Management Admit to ITU; give supportive therapy; treat the under lying cause.
  • Respiratory  support:  In  early  ARDS,  continuous  positive  airway  pressure  (CPAP) 
with 40–60% oxygen may be adequate to maintain oxygenation. But most patients 
need mechanical ventilation. Indications for ventilation: PaO2: <8.3kPa despite 60% 
O2; PaCO2: >6kPa. The large tidal volumes (10–15mL/kg) produced by conventional 
ventilation plus reduced lung compliance in ARDS may lead to high peak airway pres-
sures ± pneumothorax. A low-tidal-volume, pressure-limited approach, with either 
low or moderate high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), improves outcome.
  • Circulatory support: Invasive haemodynamic monitoring with an arterial line and 
Swan–Ganz catheter aids the diagnosis and may be helpful in monitoring PCWP and 
cardiac  output.  A  conservative  ﬂ uid  management  approach  improves  outcome. 
Maintain cardiac output and O2 delivery with inotropes (eg dobutamine 2.5–10mcg/
kg/min IVI), vasodilators, and blood transfusion. Consider treating pulmonary hyper-
tension with low-dose (20–120 parts per million) nitric oxide, a pulmonary vasodila-
tor. Haemo ﬁ ltration may be needed in renal failure and to achieve a negative ﬂ uid 
balance. 46, 49

  • Sepsis: Identify organism(s) and treat. If septic, but no organisms cultured, use 

empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics (p167). Avoid nephrotoxic antibiotics.

  • Other: Nutritional support: enteral is best: p584 & p586, with high-fat, antioxidant 
formulations. Steroids protect those at risk of fat embolization and with pneumo-
cystosis and may improve outcome in subacute ARDS. Their role in established ARDS 
is controversial. 50, 51

Prognosis Overall mortality is 50–75%. Prognosis varies with age of patient, cause 
(pneumonia 86%, trauma 38%), and number of organs involved (three organs in-
volved for >1wk is ‘invariably’ fatal).

Risk factors for ARDS
  • Sepsis
  • Hypovolaemic shock
  • Trauma
  • Pneumonia 
  • Diabetic ketoacidosis
  • Gastric aspiration
  • Pregnancy
  • Eclampsia
  • Amniotic ﬂ uid embolus 
  • Drugs/toxins
  • Paraquat, heroin, aspirin
  • Pulmonary contusion

  • Massive transfusion
  • Burns (p846) 
  • Smoke inhalation (p847)
  • Near drowning
  • Acute pancreatitis
  • DIC (p352)
  • Head injury
  • ICP
  • Fat embolus
  • Heart/lung bypass
  • Tumour lysis syndrome (p529)
  • Malaria.

_OHCM_10e.indb   186

_OHCM_10e.indb   186

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
187

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.15  Supine chest radiograph showing air-space shadowing in a perihilar distribution spread-
ing into the peripheries. This appearance can also be seen with infection and cardiogenic pulmo-
nary oedema, but clues from the history, the heart size, and lack of pleural eff usions can suggest 
ARDS over the latter. Remember though that this is a supine projection—the patient is lying ﬂ at 
with the X-ray beam AP—causing the cardiac shadow to be artiﬁ cially enlarged and pleural ef-
fusions to level out on the posterior chest wall so they will not obscure the costophrenic angles 
unless very large.

Image courtesy of Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   187

_OHCM_10e.indb   187

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
188

Respiratory failure

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Respiratory failure occurs when gas exchange is inadequate, resulting in hypoxia. It 
is deﬁ ned as a PaO2 <8kPa and subdivided into two types according to PaCO2 level.
Type I respiratory failure Deﬁ ned as hypoxia (PaO2 <8kPa) with a normal or low 
PaCO2. It is caused primarily by ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch, hypoventila-
tion, abnormal diff usion, right to left cardiac shunts. Examples of V/Q mismatch:
  • Pneumonia.
  • Pulmonary oedema.
  • PE.
  • Asthma.
  • Emphysema.
  • Pulmonary ﬁ brosis.
  • ARDS (p186).
Type  II  respiratory  failure  Deﬁ ned  as  hypoxia  (PaO2  <8kPa)  with  hypercapnia 
(PaCO2 >6.0kPa). This is caused by alveolar hypoventilation, with or without V/Q mis-
match. Causes include:
  • Pulmonary disease: Asthma, COPD, pneumonia, end-stage pulmonary ﬁ brosis, ob-

structive sleep apnoea (OSA, p194).

  • Reduced respiratory drive: Sedative drugs, CNS tumour or trauma.
  • Neuromuscular disease: Cervical cord lesion, diaphragmatic paralysis, poliomyeli-

tis, myasthenia gravis, Guillain–Barré syndrome.
  • Thoracic wall disease: Flail chest, kyphoscoliosis.
Clinical features are those of the underlying cause together with symptoms and 
signs of hypoxia, with or without hypercapnia.
Hypoxia:  Dyspnoea;  restlessness;  agitation;  confusion;  central  cyanosis.  If  long-
standing hypoxia: polycythaemia; pulmonary hypertension; cor pulmonale.
Hypercapnia:  Headache;  peripheral  vasodilation;  tachycardia;  bounding  pulse; 
tremor/ﬂ ap; papilloedema; confusion; drowsiness; coma.
Investigations are aimed at determining the underlying cause:
  • Blood tests: FBC, U&E, CRP, ABG. See table 4.7.
  • Radiology: CXR.
  • Microbiology: sputum and blood cultures (if febrile).
  • Spirometry (COPD, neuromuscular disease, Guillain–Barré syndrome).
Management Depends on the cause:
Type I respiratory failure:
  • Treat underlying cause.
  • Give oxygen (24–60%) by facemask.
  • Assisted ventilation if PaO2 <8kPa despite 60% O2.
Type II respiratory failure: The respiratory centre may be relatively insensitive to 
CO2 and respiration could be driven by hypoxia.
  • Treat underlying cause.
  • Controlled oxygen therapy: start at 24% O2. Oxygen  therapy  should  be  given 

with care. Nevertheless, don’t leave the hypoxia untreated.

  • Recheck ABG after 20min. If PaCO2 is steady or lower, increase O2 con centration to 
28%. If PaCO2 has risen >1.5kPa and the patient is still hypoxic, consider assisted 
ventilation (eg NIPPV, p813, ie non-invasive positive pressure ventilation).

  • If this fails, consider intubation and ventilation, if appropriate.

When to consider ABG (arterial blood gas) measurement
  • Any unexpected deterioration in an ill patient. (Technique: see p771.)
  • Anyone with an acute exacerbation of a chronic chest condition.
  • Anyone with impaired consciousness or impaired respiratory eff ort.
  • Signs of CO2 retention, eg bounding pulse, drowsy, tremor (ﬂ apping), headache.
  • Cyanosis, confusion, visual hallucinations (signs of PaO2; SAO2 is an alternative).
  • To validate measurements from transcutaneous pulse oximetry (p162).

_OHCM_10e.indb   188

_OHCM_10e.indb   188

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
ABG interpretation
Normal  pH  is  7.35–7.45.  pH  <7.35  indicates  acidosis  and  >7.45  indicates  alkalosis. 
If the pCO2 is in keeping with the pH, the problem is likely to be a respiratory 
Ω 
problem (eg high pCO2 and pH <7.35 = likely a respiratory acidosis). If the HCO3
is  in  keeping  with  the  pH,  this  is  suggestive  of  a  metabolic  problem  (eg  high 
HCO3
Table 4.7  Interpreting blood gas analysis

Ω and pH > 7.45 = metabolic alkalosis).

Metabolic acidosis
Respiratory acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis

pH
Low
Low
High
High

PaCO2
Normal/low
High
Normal/high
Low

Ω
HCO3
Low
Normal/high
High
Normal/low

Steps to ABG interpretation:
1      pH: acidosis or alkalosis?
2      pCO 2: high/low? Does this ﬁ t with the pH? (if yes, think respiratory problem)
3      HCO3
4      PO2: is this normal given the FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen)?
5      Is there any compensation? (i.e. changes in PCO2/HCO3

Ω: high/low? Does this ﬁ t with pH? (if yes, think metabolic problem)

Ω to try and correct an un-
derlying imbalance). Is this partial (pH abnormal) or complete (pH normalized)?
6      Calculate the anion gap. Helpful in working out aetiology of metabolic acidosis.

189

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Anion gap: (Na + + K +) Ω (Cl Ω + HCO3
See p670 for causes of raised anion gap (normal 10–18mmol/L).

Ω)

Administering oxygen
Oxygen should be prescribed. Titrate the amount guided by the patient’s SaO2 and 
clinical condition. Humidiﬁ cation is only required for longer-term delivery of O2 at 
high ﬂ ow rates and tracheostomies, but may  expectoration in bronchiectasis.
Nasal cannulae: Preferred by patients, but O2 delivery is relatively imprecise and 
may cause nasal soreness. The ﬂ ow rate (1–4L/min) roughly deﬁ nes the concentra-
tion of O2 (24–40%). May be used to maintain SaO2 when nebulizers need to be run 
using air, eg COPD.
Simple  face  mask: Delivers a variable amount of O2 depending on the rate of 
inﬂ ow. Less precise than venturi masks—so don’t use if hypercapnia or type II 
respiratory failure. Risk of CO2 accumulation (within the mask and so in inspired 
gas) if ﬂ ow rate <5L/min. Be careful in those with COPD (p812).
Venturi mask: Provides a precise percentage or fraction of O2 (FiO2) at high ﬂ ow 
rates. Start at 24–28% in COPD. Colours of masks:

BLUE = 24%,   WHITE  = 28%,  YELLOW = 35%,  RED = 40%,  GREEN = 60%.

Non-rebreathing mask: These have a reservoir bag and deliver high concentra-
tions of O2 (60–90%), determined by the inﬂ ow (10–15L/min) and the presence of 
ﬂ ap valves on the side. They are commonly used in emergencies, but are imprecise 
and should be avoided in those requiring controlled O2 therapy.
Promoting oxygenation: Other ways to  oxygenation to reach the target SaO2 
(this should be given as a number on the drug chart):
  • Treat anaemia (transfuse if essential).
  • Improve cardiac output (treat heart failure).
  • Chest physio to improve ventilation/perfusion mismatch.

_OHCM_10e.indb   189

_OHCM_10e.indb   189

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
190

Pulmonary embolism (PE)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Causes PES usually arise from a venous thrombosis in the pelvis or legs. Clots break 
off   and  pass  through  the  veins  and  the  right  side  of  the  heart  before  lodging  in 
the pulmonary circulation. Rare causes: RV thrombus (post-MI); septic emboli (right-
sided endocarditis); fat, air, or amniotic ﬂ uid embolism; neoplastic cells; parasites.
Risk factors
  • Recent surgery, especially abdominal/pelvic or hip/knee replacement.
  • Thrombophilia, eg antiphospholipid syndrome (p374).
  • Leg fracture.
  • Prolonged bed rest/reduced mobility.
  • Malignancy.
  • Pregnancy/postpartum; combined contraceptive pill; HRT (lower risk).
  • Previous PE.
Clinical  features  Small  emboli  may  be  asymptomatic,  whereas  large  emboli  are 
often fatal. Symptoms: Acute breathlessness, pleuritic chest pain, haemoptysis; diz-
ziness; syncope. Ask about risk factors, past history or family history of thromboem-
bolism. Signs: Pyrexia; cyanosis; tachypnoea; tachycardia; hypotension; raised  JVP; 
pleural rub; pleural eff usion. Look for signs of a cause, eg deep vein thrombosis.
Tests
  • FBC, U&E, baseline clotting, D-dimers (BOX).
  • ABG may show PaO2 and PaCO2.
  • Imaging: CXR may be normal, or show oligaemia of aff ected segment, dilated pul-
monary artery, linear atelectasis, small pleural eff usion, wedge-shaped opacities or 
cavitation (rare). CTPA—see ﬁ g 4.16.

  • ECG may be normal, or show tachycardia, right bundle branch block, right vent-
ricular strain (inverted T in V1 to V4). The classical SI QIII TIII pattern (p98) is rare.

Further investigations are shown on p818.
Treatment See p818. If haemodynamically unstable, thrombolyse for massive 
PE  (alteplase  10mg  IV  over  1min,  then  90mg  IVI  over  2h;  max  1 . 5mg/kg  if  <65kg). 
Haemodynamically stable: start LMWH or unfractionated heparin if underlying renal 
impairment and treat for 5 days. Then, start DOAC (direct oral anticoagulant) or war-
farin (p350). For warfarin, stop heparin when INR is 2–3, due to intial prothrombotic 
eff ect of warfarin (target INR of 2–3). Consider placement of a vena caval ﬁ lter if 
contra-indication to anticoagulation.
Unprovoked PE In patients with no known provoking risk factors, consider inves-
tigation  for  possible  underlying  malignany.  Undertake  full  history,  examination 
(including breast), CXR, FBC, calcium, LFTS, urinalysis. Patients >40yrs consider abdo-
pelvic  CT and mammography in women. Consider antiphospholipid and thrombo-
philia testing if family history positive (p374).
Prevention Give heparin to all immobile patients. Stop HRT and the combined con-
traceptive pill pre-op (if reliable with another form of contraception).

Pneumothorax

Caus  es Often spontaneous (especially in young, thin men) due to rupture of a sub-
pleural bulla. Other causes: asthma; COPD; TB; pneumonia; lung abscess; carcinoma; 
cystic ﬁ brosis; lung ﬁ brosis; sarcoidosis; connective tissue disorders (Marfan’s syn., 
Ehlers–Danlos syn.), trauma; iatrogenic (subclavian CVP line insertion, pleural aspira-
tion/biopsy, transbronchial biopsy, liver biopsy, +ve pressure ventilation).
Clinical features Symptoms: May be asymptomatic (ﬁ t, young, and small pneumo-
thorax) or there may be sudden onset of dyspnoea and/or pleuritic chest pain. Pa-
tients with asthma or COPD may present with a sudden deterioration. Mechanically 
ventilated patients may present with hypoxia or an increase in ventilation pressures. 
Signs: Reduced expansion, hyper-resonance to percussion, and diminished breath 
sounds on the aff ected side. With a tension pneumothorax, the trachea will be devi-
ated away from the aff ected side, p749, p815. Management: See p815.

_OHCM_10e.indb   190

_OHCM_10e.indb   190

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Investigating suspected PE
Diagnosis of PE is improved by adopting a stepwise approach, combining an objec-
tive probability score, with subsequent investigations, as follows.
Assess the clinical probability of a PE: Many systems exist and one of the most 
frequently used is the modiﬁ ed Wells Criteria (table 4.8).
Table 4.8  Modiﬁ ed two-level PE Wells score
Feature
Clinical signs and symptoms of DVT (leg pain and pain on deep palpation 
of veins)
Heart rate >100 beats per minute
Recently bed-ridden (>3 days) or major surgery (<4 weeks)
Previous DVT or PE
Haemoptysis
Cancer receiving active treatment , treated in last 6/12, palliative
An alternative diagnosis is less likely than PE
Score <4 = PE unlikely; score >4 = PE likely

1.5
1.5
1.5
1
1
3

Score
3

191

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Wells PS, Anderson DR, Rodger M, et al. ‘Derivation of a Simple Clinical Model to Categorize Patients 
Probability of Pulmonary Embolism: Increasing the Models Utility with the SimpliRED D-dimer’. 
Thromb Haemost 2000; 83: 416–20. 

PE suspected

Calculate modiﬁ ed Wells score

Score >4: immediate CTPA or treat 
empirically (LMWH) if delay

Score <4: do D-dimer

D dimer +ve: immediate CTPA 
or empiral treatment LMWH

D-dimer Ωve: consider 
alternative diagnosis

Length of treatment

  • Provoked: 3 months and then reassess risk to beneﬁ t proﬁ le 

(depends on whether risk factor persists)

  • Unprovoked: treatment is usually continued for >3 months (people 

with no identiﬁ able risk factor)

  • Malignancy: continue treatment with LMWH for 6 months or until 

cure of cancer

  • Pregnancy: LMWH is continued until delivery/end of pregnancy

Fig 4.16  Investigation and management of PE.

Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACS)
Oral alternatives to warfarin (dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban) have 
been available for treatment of PE since NICE approval in 2012. They have a rapid 
onset of action (without the need for LMWH overlap) and can be administered in 
ﬁ xed doses without the need for continuous monitoring. Monitoring is required 
to assess compliance, side eff ects (eg bleeding), and presence of VTE. Antidotes 
for DOACS are becoming available and in the USA idarucizumab is already licensed.

_OHCM_10e.indb   191

_OHCM_10e.indb   191

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
192

Pleural eff  usion

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

Deﬁ nitions A pleural eff usion is ﬂ uid in the pleural space. Eff usions can be divided 
by their protein concentration into transudates (<25g/L) and exudates (>35g/L), see 
BOX. Blood in the pleural space is a haemothorax, pus in the pleural space is an em-
pyema, and chyle (lymph with fat) is a chylothorax. Both blood and air in the pleural 
space is called a haemopneumothorax.
Causes Transudates may be due to venous pressure (cardiac failure, constrictive 
pericarditis, ﬂ uid overload), or hypoproteinaemia (cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, mal-
absorption). Also occur in hypothyroidism and Meigs’ syndrome (right pleural eff usion 
and ovarian ﬁ broma). Exudates are mostly due to increased leakiness of pleural cap-
illaries secondary to infection, inﬂ ammation, or malignancy. Causes: pneumonia; TB; 
pulmonary infarction; rheumatoid arthritis; SLE; bronchogenic carcin oma; malignant 
metastases; lymphoma; mesothelioma; lymphangitis carcinomatosis.
Symptoms Asymptomatic—or dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain.
Signs Decreased expansion; stony dull percussion note; diminished breath sounds 
occur on the aff ected side. Tactile vocal fremitus and vocal resonance are  (incon-
stant and unreliable). Above the eff usion, where lung is compressed, there may be 
bronchial breathing. With large eff usions there may be tracheal deviation away 
from the eff usion. Look for aspiration marks and signs of associated disease: ma-
lignancy (cachexia, clubbing, lymphadenopathy, radiation marks, mastectomy scar); 
stigmata of chronic liver disease; cardiac failure; hypothyroidism; rheumatoid arthri-
tis; butterﬂ y rash of SLE.
Tests CXR: Small eff usions blunt the costophrenic angles, larger ones are seen as 
water-dense shadows with concave upper borders. A completely ﬂ at horizontal up-
per border implies that there is also a pneumothorax.
Ultrasound is useful in identifying the presence of pleural ﬂ uid and in guiding diag-
nostic or therapeutic aspiration.
Diagnostic aspiration: Percuss the upper border of the pleural eff usion and choose 
a site 1 or 2 intercostal spaces below it (don’t go too low or you’ll be in the abdo-
men!). Inﬁ ltrate down to the pleura with 5–10mL of 1% lidocaine. Attach a 21G needle 
to a syringe and insert it just above the upper border of an appropriate rib (avoids 
neurovascular bundle). Draw off  10–30mL of pleural ﬂ uid and send it to the lab for 
clinical  chemistry  (protein,  glucose,  pH,  LDH,  amylase),  bacteriology  (microscopy 
and  culture,  auramine  stain,  TB  culture),  cytology,  and,  if  indicated,  immunology 
(rheumatoid factor, ANA, complement). See table 4.9.
Pleural biopsy: If pleural ﬂ uid analysis is inconclusive, consider parietal pleural biopsy. 
Thoracoscopic or CT-guided pleural biopsy increases diagnostic yield (by enabling 
direct visualization of the pleural cavity and biopsy of suspicious areas).
Management is of the underlying cause.
  • Drainage: If the eff usion is symptomatic, drain it, repeatedly if necessary. Fluid 
is best removed slowly (0.5–1.5L/24h). It may be aspirated in the same way as a 
diagnostic tap, or using an intercostal drain (see p766).

  • Pleurodesis with talc may be helpful for recurrent eff usions. Thorascopic mechani-
cal pleurodesis is most eff ective for malignant eff usions. Empyemas (p170) are best 
drained using a chest drain, inserted under ultrasound or CT guidance.

  • Intra-pleural alteplase and dornase alfa may help with empyema.
  • Surgery: Persistent collections and increasing pleural thickness (on ultrasound) 

requires surgery. 50

_OHCM_10e.indb   192

_OHCM_10e.indb   192

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Table 4.9  Pleural ﬂ uid analysis
Gross appearance
Clear, straw-coloured
Turbid, yellow
Haemorrhagic
Cytology
Neutrophils ++
Lymphocytes ++
Mesothelial cells ++
Abnormal mesothelial cells
Multinucleated giant cells
Lupus erythematosus cells
Malignant cells
Clinical chemistry
*Protein <25g/L
>35g/L
25–35g/L

Glucose <3.3mmol/L
pH <7.2
*LDH (pleural:serum >0.6)
Amylase

193

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Cause
Transudate, exudate
Empyema, parapneumonic eff usion 5
Trauma, malignancy, pulmonary infarction

Parapneumonic eff usion, PE
Malignancy, TB, RA, SLE, sarcoidosis
Pulmonary infarction
Mesothelioma

RA

SLE
Malignancy

Transudate
Exudate
If pleural ﬂ uid protein/serum protein >0.5, eff u-
sion is an exudate (85% speciﬁ c and sensitive)
Empyema, malignancy, TB, RA, SLE
Empyema, malignancy, TB, RA, SLE
Empyema, malignancy, TB, RA, SLE
Pancreatitis, carcinoma, bacterial pneumonia, 
oesophageal rupture

Immunology
Rheumatoid factor
Antinuclear antibody
Complement levels
* Light’s criteria for deﬁ ning an exudate: eff usion protein/serum protein >0.5; eff usion LDH/serum LDH >0.6; 
eff usion LDH > ⅔ upper reference range. 98% sensitive and 83% speciﬁ c.

SLE
RA, SLE, malignancy, infection

RA

5  Inﬂ ammation of the pleura caused by pneumonia may lead to infected pleural ﬂ uid (empyema); if it is not 
infected, the term parapneumonic eff usion is used.

_OHCM_10e.indb   193

_OHCM_10e.indb   193

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
194

Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

This  disorder  is  characterized  by  intermittent  closure/collapse  of  the  pharyngeal 
air way  causing  apnoeic  episodes  during  sleep.  These  are  terminated  by  partial 
arousal.
Clinical features The typical patient is an obese, middle-aged man who presents 
because of snoring or daytime somnolence. His partner often describes apnoeic epi-
sodes during sleep.
  • Loud snoring.
  • Daytime somnolence.
  • Poor sleep quality.
  • Morning headache.
  • Decreased libido.
  • Nocturia.
  • Cognitive performance.
Complications  Pulmonary  hypertension;  type  II  respiratory  failure  (p188).  Sleep 
apnoea is also reported as an independent risk factor for hypertension. 51
Investigations Simple studies (eg pulse oximetry, video recordings) may be all that 
are required for diagnosis. Polysomnography (which monitors oxygen saturation, 
airﬂ ow at the nose and mouth, ECG, EMG chest, and abdominal wall movement during 
sleep) is diagnostic. The occurrence of 15 or more episodes of apnoea or hypopnoea 
during 1h of sleep, on average, indicates signiﬁ cant sleep apnoea.
Management
  • Weight reduction.
  • Avoidance of tobacco and alcohol.
  • Mandibular advancement device.
  • CPAP via a nasal mask during sleep is eff ective and recommended by NICE for those 

with moderate to severe disease. 52

  • Surgery to relieve pharyngeal or nasal obstruction, eg tonsillectomy or polypectomy, 

is occasionally needed.

Cor pulmonale

Cor pulmonale is right heart failure caused by chronic pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion. Causes include chronic lung disease, pulmonary vascular disorders, and neuro-
muscular and skeletal diseases (see BOX).
Clinical features Symptoms include dyspnoea, fatigue, and syncope. Signs: cya-
nosis; tachycardia; raised JVP with prominent a and v waves; RV heave; loud P2, pan-
systolic  murmur  (tricuspid  regurgitation);  early  diastolic  Graham  Steell  murmur; 
hepatomegaly and oedema.
Investigations FBC: Hb and haematocrit  (secondary polycythaemia). ABG: hypoxia, 
with or without hypercapnia. CXR: enlarged right atrium and ventricle, prominent 
pulmonary arteries (see ﬁ g 4.17). ECG: P pulmonale; right axis deviation; right ven-
tricular hyper trophy/strain.
Management
  • Treat underlying cause—eg COPD and pulmonary infections.
  • Treat  respiratory  failure—in the acute situation give 24% oxygen if PaO2 <8kPa. 
Monitor ABG and gradually increase oxygen concentration if PaCO2 is stable (p188). 
In COPD patients, long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) for 16h/d increases survival (p184). 
Patients with chronic hypoxia when clinically stable should be assessed for LTOT.
  • Treat cardiac failure with diuretics such as furosemide, eg 40–160mg/24h PO. Moni-
tor  U&E  and  give  amiloride  or  potassium  supplements  if  necessary.  Alternative: 
spironolactone.

  • Consider venesection if haematocrit >55%.
  • Consider heart–lung transplantation in young patients.
Prognosis Poor. 50% die within 5yrs.

_OHCM_10e.indb   194

_OHCM_10e.indb   194

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Causes of cor pulmonale
Lung disease
  • COPD
  • Bronchiectasis
  • Pulmonary ﬁ brosis
  • Severe chronic asthma
  • Lung resection.
Pulmonary vascular disease
  • Pulmonary emboli
  • Pulmonary vasculitis
  • Primary pulmonary hypertension
  • ARDS (p186)
  • Sickle-cell disease
  • Parasite infestation.

Thoracic cage abnormality
  • Kyphosis
  • Scoliosis
  • Thoracoplasty.
Neuromuscular disease
  • Myasthenia gravis
  • Poliomyelitis
  • Motor neuron disease.
Hypoventilation
  • Sleep apnoea
  • Enlarged adenoids in children.
Cerebrovascular disease

195

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.17  PA chest radiograph showing enlarged pulmonary arteries from pulmonary artery hyper-
tension. When caused by interstitial lung disease and leading to right heart failure, this would be 
termed cor pulmonale. No signs of interstitial lung disease are identiﬁ able in this image.

 Image courtesy of Derby Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   195

_OHCM_10e.indb   195

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
196

Sarcoidosis

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

A  multisystem  granulomatous  disorder  of  unknown  cause.  Prevalence  highest  in 
Northern Europe, eg UK: 10–20/105 population. Usually aff ects adults aged 20–40yrs, 
more  common  in  women.  African–Caribbeans  are  aff ected  more  frequently  and 
more severely than Caucasians, particularly by extra-thoracic disease. Associated 
with HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 alleles. For other causes of granuloma see table 4.10.
Clinical features In 20–40%, the disease is discovered incidentally, after a routine 
CXR, and is thus asymptomatic. Acute sarcoidosis often presents with fever, erythe-
ma nodosum (ﬁ g 12.21, p563),6 polyarthralgia, and bilateral hilar lymphodenopathy 
(BHL), also called Löfgren syndrome, which usually resolves spontaneously.
Pulmonary disease: 90% have abnormal CXRs with BHL (ﬁ g 4.18) ± pulmonary inﬁ l-
trates or ﬁ brosis; see later in topic for staging. Symptoms: Dry cough, progressive 
dyspnoea, exercise tolerance, and chest pain. In 10–20%, symptoms progress, with 
concurrent deterioration in lung function.
Non-pulmonary  signs:  These  are  legion:  lymphadenopathy;  hepatomegaly;  sple-
nomegaly;  uveitis;  conjunctivitis;  keratoconjunctivitis  sicca;  glaucoma;  terminal 
phalangeal bone cysts; enlargement of lacrimal & parotid glands (ﬁ g 8.49, p355); 
Bell’s palsy; neuropathy; meningitis; brainstem and spinal syndromes; space-occupy-
ing lesion; erythema nodosum (ﬁ g 12.21, p563); lupus pernio; subcutaneous nodules; 
cardio myopathy; arrhythmias; hypercalcaemia; hypercalciuria; renal stones; pitui-
tary dysfunction.
Tests  Blood:  ESR,  lymphopenia,  LFT,  serum  ACE  in  ~60%  (non-speciﬁ c),  Ca2+, 
immun oglobulins. 24h urine: Ca2+. CXR is abnormal in 90%: Stage 0: normal. Stage 
1: BHL. Stage 2: BHL + peripheral pulmonary inﬁ ltrates. Stage 3: peripheral pulmonary 
inﬁ ltrates alone. Stage 4: progressive pulmonary ﬁ brosis; bulla formation (honey-
combing); pleural involvement. ECG may show arrhythmias or bundle branch block. 
Lung function tests may be normal or show reduced lung volumes, impaired gas 
transfer, and a restrictive ventilatory defect. Tissue biopsy (lung, liver, lymph nodes, 
skin nodules, or lacrimal glands) is diagnostic and shows non-caseating granulo-
mata.
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL): Shows lymphocytes in active disease; neutrophils 
with pulmonary ﬁ brosis. Transbrochial biopsy: May be diagnostic.
Ultrasound: May show nephrocalcinosis or hepatosplenomegaly.
Bone X-rays: Show ‘punched out’ lesions in terminal phalanges.
CT/MRI:  May  be  useful  in  assessing  severity  of  pulmonary  disease  or  diagnosing 
neurosarcoidosis.  Ophthalmology  assessment  (slit  lamp  examination,  ﬂ uorescein 
angiography) is indicated in ocular disease.
Management Patients with BHL alone don’t need treatment as most recover spon-
taneously.53, 54 Acute sarcoidosis: bed rest, NSAIDS.
Indications for corticosteroids:
  • Parenchymal lung disease (symptomatic, static, or progressive).
  • Uveitis.
  • Hypercalcaemia.
  • Neurological or cardiac involvement.
Prednisolone (40mg/24h) PO for 4–6 wks, then dose over 1yr according to clinical 
status. A few patients relapse and may need a further course or long-term therapy.
Other  therapy:  In  severe  illness,  IV  methylprednisolone  or  immuno suppressants 
(methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, ciclosporin, cyclophosphamide) may be needed. 
Anti-TNF therapy may be tried in refractory cases, or lung transplantation.
Prognosis 60% of patients with thoracic sarcoidosis resolve over 2yrs. 20% respond 
to steroid therapy; in the rest, improvement is unlikely despite therapy.7

6  A detailed history and exam (including for synovitis) + CXR, 2 ASO (antistreptolysin-O) titres and a tuber-
culin skin test are usually enough to diagnose erythema nodosum.
7  ACE is also  in: hyperthyroidism, Gaucher’s, silicosis, TB, hyper sensitivity pneumonitis, asb es tosis, pneu-
mocystosis.55 ACE levels in CSF help diagnose CNS sarcoidosis (when serum ACE may be normal).56 ACE is lower 
in: Caucasians; and anorexia.57

_OHCM_10e.indb   196

_OHCM_10e.indb   196

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
TB, leprosy, syphilis, 
cat scratch fever
Cryptococcus neoformans 
Coccidioides immitis
Schistosomiasis

Table 4.10  Diff erential diagnosis of granulomatous diseases
Infections

Bacteria

Fungi

Protozoa
Primary biliary cholangitis 
Granulomatous orchitis
Giant cell arteritis 
Polyarteritis nodosa 
Takayasu’s arteritis 
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Silicosis, berylliosis
Crohn’s disease 
De Quervain’s thyroiditis 
Sarcoidosis

Autoimmune

Vasculitis (p556)

Organic dust disease
Idiopathic

Extrinsic allergic alveolitis
Histiocytosis X

197

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig  4.18  PA  chest  radiograph  showing  bilateral  hilar  lymphadenopathy.  The  important  diff er-
entials  for  this  appearance  are:  sarcoidosis,  TB,  lymphoma,  pneumoconioses,  and  metastatic 
disease. This patient has sarcoidosis but there are no other stigmata (such as the presence of 
inﬁ ltrates, ﬁ brosis, and honeycombing) on this image.

Image courtesy of Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Trust Radiology Department.

Causes of BHL (bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy)
  • Sarcoidosis
  • Infection, eg TB, mycoplasma
  • Malignancy, eg lymphoma, carcinoma, mediastinal tumours
  • Organic dust disease, eg silicosis, berylliosis
  • Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
  • Histocytosis X (Langerhan’s cell histiocytosis).

_OHCM_10e.indb   197

_OHCM_10e.indb   197

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
198

Interstitial lung disease (ILD)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

This is the generic term used to describe a number of conditions that primarily af-
fect the lung parenchyma in a diff use manner.58 They are characterized by chronic 
inﬂ ammation and/or progressive interstitial ﬁ brosis (table 4.11), and share a number 
of clinical and pathological features. See table 4.11 and ﬁ g 4.19.
Clinical  features  Dyspnoea  on  exertion;  non-productive  paroxysmal  cough;  ab-
normal  breath  sounds;  abnormal  CXR or  high-resolution  CT;  restrictive  pulmonary 
spirometry with DLCO (p164).
Pathological features Fibrosis and remodelling of the interstitium; chronic inﬂ am-
mation; hyperplasia of type II epithelial cells or type II pneumocytes.
Classiﬁ cation The ILDS can be broadly grouped into three categories:
Those with known cause, eg:
  • Occupational/environmental,  eg  asbestosis,  berylliosis,  silicosis,  cotton  worker’s 

lung (byssinosis).

  • Drugs, eg nitrofurantoin, bleomycin, amiodarone, sulfasalazine, busulfan.
  • Hypersensitivity reactions, eg hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
  • Infections, eg TB, fungi, viral.
  • Gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux.
Those associated with systemic disorders, eg:
  • Sarcoidosis.
  • Rheumatoid arthritis.
  • SLE, systemic sclerosis, mixed connective tissue disease, Sjögren’s syndrome.
  • Ulcerative colitis, renal tubular acidosis, autoimmune thyroid disease.
Idiopathic, eg:
  • Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis (IPF, p200).
  • Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia.
  • Non-speciﬁ c interstitial pneumonitis.

Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA)

In sensitized individuals, repetitive inhalation of allergens (fungal spores or avian 
proteins) provokes a hypersensitivity reaction which varies in intensity and clini-
cal course depending on the antigen. In the acute phase, the alveoli are inﬁ ltrated 
with acute inﬂ ammatory cells. Early diagnosis and prompt allergen removal can halt 
and reverse disease progression, so prognosis can be good. With chronic exposure, 
granuloma formation and obliterative bronchiolitis occur.
Causes
  • Bird-fancier’s and pigeon-fancier’s lung (proteins in bird droppings).
  • Farmer’s  and  mushroom  worker’s  lung  (Micropolyspora  faeni,  Thermoactino-

myces vulgaris).

  • Malt worker’s lung (Aspergillus clavatus).
  • Bagassosis or sugar worker’s lung (Thermoactinomyces sacchari ).
Clinical features 4–6h post-exposure: Fever, rigors, myalgia, dry cough, dyspnoea, 
ﬁ ne bibasal crackles. Chronic: Finger clubbing (50%), increasing dyspnoea, weight, 
exertional dyspnoea, type I respiratory failure, cor pulmonale.
Tests Acute: Blood: FBC (neutrophilia); ESR; ABGS; serum antibodies (may indicate 
exposure/previous sensitization rather than disease). CXR: upper-zone mottling/con-
solidation; hilar lymph adenopathy (rare). Lung function tests: Reversible restrictive 
defect; reduced gas transfer during acute attacks. Chronic: Blood tests: serum anti-
bodies. CXR: upper-zone ﬁ brosis; honeycomb lung. CT chest: nodules, ground glass ap-
pearance, extensive ﬁ brosis. Lung function tests: restrictive defect. Bronchoalveolar 
lavage (BAL) ﬂ uid shows lymphocytes and mast cells.
Management  Acute:  Remove  allergen  and  give  O2  (35–60%),  PO  prednisolone 
(40mg/24h PO), reducing course. Chronic: Allergen avoidance, or wear a facemask 
or +ve pressure helmet. Long-term steroids often achieve CXR and physiological im-
provement. Compen sation (UK Industrial Injuries Act) may be payable.

_OHCM_10e.indb   198

_OHCM_10e.indb   198

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
199

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Fig 4.19  AP chest radiograph showing air-space shadowing in the left upper zone. Although this 
appearance often represents infection, it is non-speciﬁ c. Diff erential diagnosis for this distribution 
of shadowing include lymphoma, alveolar cell carcinoma (both to be considered if not resolving in 
appearance on follow-up imaging), and haemorrhage.

Image courtesy of Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust Radiology Department.

Table 4.11  Causes of ﬁ brotic shadowing on a CXR
Upper zone
TB 
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Radiotherapy
Progressive massive ﬁ brosis 
(PMF)

Mid zone
Sarcoidosis, histoplasmosis Idiopathic pulmonary 

Lower zone

ﬁ brosis
Asbestosis

_OHCM_10e.indb   199

_OHCM_10e.indb   199

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
200

Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis (IPF)

This is a type of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. Inﬂ ammatory cell inﬁ ltrate and 
pulmonary ﬁ brosis of unknown cause. It is the commonest cause of interstitial lung 
disease.
Symptoms Dry cough; exertional dyspnoea; malaise; weight; arthralgia.
Signs Cyanosis; ﬁ nger clubbing; ﬁ ne end-inspiratory crepitations.
Complications Respiratory failure; risk of lung cancer.
Tests Blood: ABG (PaO2; if severe, PaCO2); CRP; immunoglobulins; ANA (30% +ve), 
rheumatoid factor (10% +ve). Imaging: (ﬁ g 4.20) Lung volume; bilateral lower zone 
reticulo-nodular shadows; honeycomb lung (advanced disease). CT: Shows similar 
changes to the CXR but is more sensitive and is an essential for diagnosis. Spirom-
etry:  Restrictive  (p162);  transfer  factor.  BAL:  May  indicate  activity  of  alveolitis: 
lymphocytes  (good  response/prognosis)  or  neutrophils  and  eosinophils  (poor 
response/prognosis).  99TCm-DTPA scan: (diethylene-triamine-penta-acetic acid) May 
reﬂ ect disease activity.59 Lung biopsy: May be needed for diagnosis. The histological 
changes observed on biopsy are referred to as usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP).
Management Supportive care: oxygen, pulmonary rehabilitation, opiates, palliative 
care input. All patients should be considered for current clinical trials or lung trans-
plantation. 60 It is strongly recommended that high-dose steroids are not used except 
where the diagnosis of IPF is in doubt. 
Prognosis 50% 5yr survival rate (range 1–20yrs).

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

t
s
e
h
C

A new treatment emerges for suff  erers of IPF
Nintedanib and pirfenidone have been shown to slow disease progression and off er 
some hope to suff erers of IPF. Pirfenidone, an immunosuppressant and antiﬁ brotic 
agent, showed a reduction in the rate of lung scarring and has been shown to improve 
life expectancy compared to best supportive care.61 Nintedanib targets three growth 
factor receptors involved in pulmonary ﬁ brosis.

Fig 4.20  Interstitial lung disease due to idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis (a similar appearance to the 
interstitial oedema of moderate left heart failure, but without a big heart).

Courtesy of Prof P Scally.

_OHCM_10e.indb   200

_OHCM_10e.indb   200

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
201

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
t
s
e
h
C

Industrial dust diseases

Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP) A common dust disease in countries that 
have or have had underground coal-mines. It results from inhalation of coal dust par-
ticles (1–3μm in diameter) over 15–20yrs. These are ingested by macrophages which 
die, releasing their enzymes and causing ﬁ brosis.
Clinical features: Asymptomatic, but coexisting chronic bronchitis is common. CXR: 
many round opacities (1–10mm), especially in upper zone.
Management:  Avoid  exposure  to  coal  dust;  treat  co-existing  chronic  bronchitis; 
claim compensation (in the UK, via the Industrial Injuries Act).
Progressive massive ﬁ brosis (PMF) Due to progression of CWP, which causes pro-
gressive  dyspnoea,  ﬁ brosis,  and,  eventually,  cor  pulmonale.  CXR:  usually  bilateral, 
upper-mid zone ﬁ brotic masses (1–10cm), develop from periphery towards hilum.
Management: Avoid exposure to coal dust; claim compensation (as for CWP).
Caplan’s syndrome The association between rheumatoid arthritis, pneumo coniosis, 
and pulmonary rheumatoid nodules.
Silicosis (See ﬁ g 4.21.) Caused by inhalation of silica particles, which are very ﬁ bro-
genic. A number of jobs may be associated with exposure, eg metal mining, stone 
quarrying, sandblasting, and pottery/ceramic manufacture.
Clinical features: Progressive dyspnoea, incidence of TB, CXR shows diff use miliary 
or nodular pattern in upper and mid-zones and egg-shell calciﬁ cation of hilar nodes. 
Spirometry: restrictive ventilatory defect.
Management: Avoid exposure to silica; claim compensation (as for CWP).
Asbestosis Caused by inhalation of asbestos ﬁ bres. Asbestos was commonly used 
in the building trade for ﬁ re prooﬁ ng, pipe lagging, electrical wire insulation, and 
rooﬁ ng felt. Degree of asbestos exposure is related to degree of pulmonary ﬁ brosis.
Clinical features: Similar to other ﬁ brotic lung diseases with progressive dyspnoea, 
clubbing,  and  ﬁ ne  end-inspiratory  crackles.  Also  causes  pleural  plaques,  risk  of 
bronchial adenocarcinoma and mesothelioma.
Management: Symptomatic. Patients are often eligible for compensation through 
the UK Industrial Injuries Act.
Mesothelioma See p174.

Fig 4.21  PA chest radiograph showing diff use nodular opacities with a focal area of irregular soft 
tissue shadowing in the right upper zone, consistent with silicosis and developing progressive mas-
sive ﬁ brosis (PMF). 
Image courtesy of Derby Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   201

_OHCM_10e.indb   201

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
5  Endocrinology

Contents
The essence of endocrinology  203
Endocrine physiology  204

Diabetes mellitus (DM):
Classiﬁ cation and diagnosis  206
Treating diabetes mellitus  208
Complications of established 

diabetes  210

Diabetic neuropathy and diabetic 

foot care  212
Hypoglycaemia  214
Insulinoma  215

Thyroid and parathyroid disease:
Thyroid function tests (TFTS)  216
Thyrotoxicosis 218
Hypothyroidism (myxoedema)  220
Parathyroid hormone and 
hyperparathyroidism  222

Hypoparathyroidism  222

The adrenal gland:
Adrenal cortex and Cushing’s 

syndrome  224

Addison’s disease (adrenal insuf-

ﬁ ciency)  226

Hyperaldosteronism  228
Phaeochromocytoma  228
Hirsutism, virilism, gynaecomastia, 

and impotence  230

The pituitary gland:
Hypopituitarism  232
Pituitary tumours  234
Hyperprolactinaemia  236
Acromegaly  238
Diabetes insipidus (DI)  240

Fig  5.1  Our  understanding  of  hormones,  while 
still  evolving,  originated  from  a  mix  of  random  ex-
periments,  coincidental  ﬁ ndings,  and  extraordinary 
sounding characters! One of these was the ‘castrati’ 
that featured in opera throughout the 16th, 17th, and 
18th centuries. These were boys who were castrated 
before puberty. The voice of a castrato was pure and 
forceful,  due  to  their  enormous  lung  capacity  and 
resulting  breath  control.  They  also  experienced  no 
temporal  recession,  and  their  arms  and  legs  were 
long. One of the most well renowned was Farinelli, 
the stage name of Carlo Maria Michelangelo Nicola 
Broschi. It was said he had a well-modulated soprano 
voice with extraordinary breath control. His picture 
hangs in Handel’s house in London. The practice was 
stopped  in  the  early  20th  century  when  it  was  ac-
knowledged how inhumane the operation was.

We thank Dr Stephen Gilbey, our Specialist Reader for this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   202

_OHCM_10e.indb   202

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

203

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

The essence of endocrinology
For scientists
  • Deﬁ ne a syndrome, and match it to a gland malfunction.
  • Measure the gland’s output in the peripheral blood. Deﬁ ne clinical syndromes 
associated with too much or too little secretion (hyper- and hypo-syndromes, 
respectively; eu- means normal, neither  nor , as in euthyroid). Note factors that 
may make measurement variable, eg diurnal release of cortisol.

  • If suspecting hormone deﬁ ciency, test by stimulating the gland that produces it 
(eg short ACTH stimulation test or Synacthen® test in Addison’s). If the gland is 
not functioning normally, there will be a blunted response to stimulation.

  • If suspecting hormone excess, test by inhibiting the gland that produces it (eg 
dexamethasone suppression test in Cushing’s). If there is a hormone-secreting 
tumour then this will fail to suppress via normal feedback mechanisms.

  • Find a way to image the gland. NB: non-functioning tumours or ‘incidentalomas’ 
may be found in health, see p224. Imaging alone does not make the diagnosis.
  • Aim to halt disease progression; diet and exercise can stop progression of im-
paired fasting glucose to frank diabetes. 1, 2 For other glands, halting progression 
will depend on understanding autoimmunity, and the interaction of genes and 
environment. In thyroid autoimmunity (an archetypal autoimmune disease), it 
is possible to track interactions between genes and environment (eg smoking 
and stress) via expression of immuno logically active molecules (HLA class I and 
II, adhesion molecules, cytokines, CD40, and complement regulatory proteins). 3
Endocrinologists  love  this  reductionist  approach,  but  have  been  less  successful 
at  understanding  emergent  phenomena—those  properties  and  performances  of 
ours  that  cannot  be  predicted  from  full  knowledge  of  our  perturbed  parts.   We 
understand  the  diurnal  nature  of  cortisol  secretion,  for  example,  but  the  science 
of relating this to dreams, the consolidation of memory, and the psychopathology 
of families and other groups (such as the endocrinology ward round you may be 
about to join) is in its infancy.  But as doctors we are steeped in the hormonal lives 
of patients (as they are in ours)—and we may as well start by recognizing this now.
For those doing exams
‘What’s  wrong  with  him?’  your  examiner  asks,  boldly.  While  you  apologize  to 
the patient for this rudeness by asking, ‘Is it alright if we speak about you as if 
you weren’t here?’, think to yourself that if you were a betting man or woman 
you would wager that the diagnosis will be endocrinological. In no other disci-
pline are gestalt impressions so characteristic. To get good at recognizing these 
conditions,  spend  time  in  endocrinology  outpatients  and  looking  at  collections 
of clinical photographs. Also, speciﬁ c cutaneous signs are important, as follows.
Thyrotoxicosis: Hair loss; pretibial myxoedema (confusing term, p218); onycho-
lysis (nail separation from the nailbed); bulging eyes (exophthalmos/proptosis).
Hypothyroidism: Hair loss; eyebrow loss; cold, pale skin; characteristic face. You 
might, perhaps should, fail your exam if you blurt out ‘Toad-like face’.
Cushing’s  syndrome:  Central  obesity  and  wasted  limbs  (=‘lemon 
on sticks’ see ﬁ g 5.2); moon face; buff alo hump; supraclavicular fat 
pads; striae.
Addison’s disease: Hyperpigmentation (face, neck, palmar creases).
Acromegaly: Acral (distal) + soft tissue overgrowth; big jaws (macro-
gnathia), hands and feet; the skin is thick; facial features are coarse.
Hyperandrogenism (): Hirsutism; temporal balding; acne.
Hypopituitarism:  Pale  or  yellow  tinged  thinned  skin,  resulting  in 
ﬁ ne wrinkling around the eyes and mouth, making the patient look 
older.
Hypoparathyroidism: Dry, scaly, puff y skin; brittle nails; coarse hair.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism:  Short  stature,  short  neck,  and  short 
4th and 5th metacarpals.

Fig  5.2  ‘Lemon 
on sticks.’

_OHCM_10e.indb   203

_OHCM_10e.indb   203

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

204

Endocrine physiology

Hormones are chemical messengers which act directly on nearby cells (paracrine 
eff ect), on the cell of origin (autocrine eff ect), at a distant site (endocrine eff ect), or 
as neurotransmitters (brain and gastrointestinal tract). Thirst, thermal regulation, 
appetite, sleep cycles, menstrual cycle, and stress/mood are all controlled by the 
hypothalamus. Releasing factors produced by the hypothalamus reach the pituitary 
via the portal system (pituitary stalk), see ﬁ g 5.3. The releasing factors stimulate or 
inhibit the production of hormones from the anterior pituitary, ﬁ g 5.4. Vasopressin 
and oxytocin are produced in the hypothalamus and stored and released from the 
posterior pituitary.

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Hypothalamus

Releasing factors

Anterior pituitary

Posterior pituitary

LH/FSH

GH

TSH

ACTH

Prolactin

Vasopressin

Oxytocin

Ovaries and 
testes

Many 
tissues

Testosterone/
oestrogens

Thyroid

Adrenals

Breasts/
gonads

Renal 
tubules

Breasts/
uterus

Steroids

Thyroxine

Lactation

Fig 5.3  Hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

Fig 5.4  Neuroregulation and integration of endocrine axes makes us who we are—and who we are 
and what we do feeds back into our hormonal milieu. Multifactorial dis ruptions within the growth 
hormone (GH), luteinizing hormone (LH)–testosterone, adreno cortico tropin (ACTH)–cortisol and insu-
lin axes play a major role in healthy maturation and ageing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   204

_OHCM_10e.indb   204

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

205

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   205

_OHCM_10e.indb   205

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

206

Diabetes mellitus (DM): classiﬁ cation and diagnosis

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

DM results from lack, or reduced eff ectiveness, of endogenous insulin. Hyperglycae-
mia is one aspect of a far-reaching metabolic derangement, which causes serious 
microvascular (retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy) or macrovascular problems: 
stroke, MI, renovascular disease, limb ischaemia. So think of DM as a vascular dis-
ease:1 adopt a holistic approach and consider other cardiovascular risk factors too.
Categories of diabetes and dyslipidaemia
Type 1 DM: Usually adolescent onset but may occur at any age. Cause: insulin de-
ﬁ ciency  from  autoimmune  destruction  of  insulin-secreting  pancreatic   cells.  Pa-
tients must have insulin, and are prone to ketoacidosis and weight loss. Associated 
with other autoimmune diseases (>90% HLA DR3 ± DR4). Concordance is only ~30% in 
identical twins, indic ating environmental inﬂ uence. Four genes are important: one 
(6q) determines islet sensitivity to damage (eg from viruses or cross-reactivity from 
cows’ milk-induced antibodies). Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) is a 
form of type 1 DM, with slower progression to insulin dependence in later life.
Type 2 DM: (Formerly non-insulin-dependent DM, NIDDM) is at ‘epidemic’ levels in many 
places, mainly due to changes in lifestyle, but also because of better diagnosis and 
improved long evity.4 Higher prevalence in Asians, men, and the elderly (up to 18%).   
Most are over 40yrs, but teenagers are now getting type 2 DM (OHCS p156). Cause: 
insulin secretion ± insulin resistance. It is associated with obesity, lack of exercise, 
calorie and alcohol excess. 80% concordance in identical twins, indicating stronger 
genetic inﬂ uence than in type 1 DM. Typically progresses from a preliminary phase of 
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or impaired fasting glucose (IFG). (This is a unique 
window for lifestyle intervention.) Maturity   onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a 
rare autosomal dominant form of type 2 DM aff ecting young people.
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT): Fasting plasma glucose <7mmol/L and OGTT (oral 
glucose tolerance) 2h glucose ≥7.8mmol/L but <11.1mmol/L.
Impaired fasting glucose (IFG): Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 6.1mmol/L but <7mmol/L 
(WHO criteria). Do an OGTT to exclude DM. The cut-off  point is somewhat arbitrary.
IGT and IFG denote diff erent abnormalities of glucose regulation (post-prandial and 
fasting). There may be lower risk of progression to DM in IFG than IGT. Manage both 
with lifestyle advice (p93) + annual review. Incidence of DM if IFG and HbA1C at high 
end of normal (37–46mmol/mol) is ~25%.5
Other causes of DM Steroids; anti-HIV drugs; newer antipsychotics.  
  • Pancreatic:  pancreatitis;  surgery  (where  >90%  pancreas  is  removed);  trauma; 

pancreatic destruction (haemochromatosis, cystic ﬁ brosis); pancreatic cancer.
  • Cushing’s disease; acromegaly; phaeochromocytoma; hyperthyroidism; pregnancy.
  • Others: congenital lipodystrophy; glycogen storage diseases.
Metabolic syndrome (syndrome x) Deﬁ nition from International Diabetes Federa-
tion: central obesity (BMI >30, or  waist circ, ethnic-speciﬁ c values), plus two of BP ≥130/85, 
triglycerides  ≥1.7mmol/L,  HDL  ≤ 1.03/1.29mmol/L,  fasting  glucose  ≥5.6mmol/L  or 
type 2 DM. ~20% are aff ected; weight, genetics, and insulin resistance important in aetiol-
ogy. Vascular events—but probably not beyond the combined eff ect of individual risk 
factors. : Exercise; weight; treat individual components.

1  Chicken or egg? Most type 2 diabetes-associated genes have a function in the vasculature, and str ess in 
-cells can result from vascular defects in the pancreas, so maybe vascular events trigger DM.6

_OHCM_10e.indb   206

_OHCM_10e.indb   206

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

207

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus: WHO criteria (rather arbitrary!)
  • Symptoms of hyperglycaemia (eg polyuria, polydipsia, unexplained weight loss, 
visual  blurring,  genital  thrush,  lethargy)  AND  raised  venous  glucose  detected 
once—fasting ≥7mmol/L or random ≥11.1mmol/L OR

  • Raised venous glucose on two separate occasions—fasting ≥7mmol/L, random 

≥11.1mmol/L or oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)—2h value ≥11.1mmol/L

  • HbA1c ≥48mmol/mol. Avoid in pregnancy, children, type 1 DM, and haemoglobi-

nopathies.

Whenever you have a needle in a vein, do a blood glucose (unless recently done); 
note if fasting or not. Non-systematic, but better than urine tests (false Ωves).

Diff  erentiating type 1 and 2 diabetes
Occasionally it may be diffi  cult to diff erentiate whether a patient has type 1 or 2 
DM, although they can present diff erently (see table 5.1). Features of type 1 include 
weight loss; persistent hyper glycaemia despite diet and medications; presence of 
autoantibodies: islet cell antibodies (ICA) and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD) antibodies; ketonuria.
Table 5.1  Diff erences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes

HLA D3 and D4 linked
Autoimmune -cell destruction

Type 2 DM
Type 1 DM
Epidemiology Often starts before puberty
Older patients (usually)
Genetics
No HLA association
Cause
Insulin resistance/-cell dysfunction
Presentation Polydipsia, polyuria, weight, ketosis Asymptomatic/complications, eg MI
Not all new-onset DM in older people is type 2: if ketotic ± a poor response to oral hy-
poglycaemics (and patient is slim or has a family or personal history of autoimmunity), 
think of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) and measure islet cell antibodies.

What is the best diet for obese patients with type 2 diabetes?
Dietary  carbohydrate  is  a  big  determinant  of  postprandial  glucose  levels,  and 
low-carbohydrate diets improve glycaemic control. How do low-carbohydrate, ke-
togenic diets (<20g of carbohydrate daily; LCKD) compare with low-glycaemic in-
dex, reduced-calorie diet (eg 500kcal/day deﬁ cit from weight maintenance diet)? 
In one randomized study over 24 weeks, LCKD had greater improvements in HbA1c 
(Ω15 vs Ω5mmol/L), weight (Ω11kg vs Ω7kg), and HDL. Diabetes drugs were reduced 
or eliminated in 95% of LCKD vs 62% of LGID participants.6 NB: eff ects on renal func-
tion and mortality are unknown so these diets remain controversial.
Monitoring glucose control

1      Fingerprick glucose if on insulin (type 1/2). NB: before a meal informs about 
long-acting insulin doses; after meals inform about the dose of short-acting 
insulin.

2      Glycated  haemoglobin  (HbA1c)  relates  to  mean  glucose  level  over  previous 
8wks  (RBC  t½).  Targets  are  negotiable,  eg  48–57mmol/mol  (depends  on  pa-
tient’s wish and arterial risk, eg past MI or stroke). If at risk from the eff ects of 
hypoglycaemia, eg elderly patients prone to falls, consider less tight control. 
Tight control may not alter all-cause mortality.7 Complications rise with rising 
HbA1c, so any improvement helps.

3      Be  sure  to  ask  about  hypoglycaemic  attacks  (and  whether  symptomatic). 
Hypoglycaemic awareness may diminish if control is too tight, or with time 
in type 1 DM, due to glucagon secretion. It may return if control is loosened.

_OHCM_10e.indb   207

_OHCM_10e.indb   207

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

208

Treating diabetes mellitus

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

General Focus on education and lifestyle advice (eg exercise to insulin sensitiv-
ity), healthy eating: p244—saturated fats, sugar, starch-carbohydrate, moder ate 
prot ein. Foods made just for diabetics are not needed. One could regard bariatric 
surgery as a cure for DM in selected patients. Be prepared to negotiate HbA1c target 
and review every 3–6 months. Assess global vascular risk; start a high-intensity sta-
tin (p115), eg atorvastatin as tolerated, control BP (p211). Give foot-care (p212). (Pre-)
pregnancy care should be in a multidisciplinary clinic (OHCS p23). Advise informing 
DVLA and not to drive if hypoglycaemic spells (p159; loss of hypo glycaemia awareness 
may lead to loss of licence; permanent if HGV).
Type 1 DM Insulin (see BOX ‘Using insulin’).
Type 2 DM See ﬁ g 5.5.

Lifestyle modiﬁ cation
Diet, weight control, exercise

Monotherapy
1st-line standard release metformin

If HbA1C rises to 58mmol/mol, consider dual therapy with:
1      Metformin + DPP4 inhibitor (eg sitagliptin)
2      Metformin and pioglitazone
3      Metformin and sulphonylurea (SU)
4      Metformin and SGLT-2i (glifazon)

If HbA1C rises to 58mmol/mol, triple therapy with:
1      Metformin, DPP4 inhibitor, + SU
2      Metformin, pioglitazone, + SU
3      Metformin, SU/pioglitazone, + SGLT-2i
4      Insulin-based therapy

Insulin: see BOX ‘Using insulin’. Use 
a structured programme. Review the 
need for existing oral treatments.

Triple therapy not tolerated:
metformin, SU and GLP 1 mimetic 
(see BOX ‘GLP analogues’).

Fig 5.5  Management of type 2 diabetes. Aim for HbA1C 48mmol/mol or 53 if two or more agents.

Data from Algorithm for blood glucose lowering therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes,
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/chapter/1-Recommendations#drug-treatment-2

Oral hypoglycaemic agents
Metformin: A biguanide.  insulin sensitivity and helps weight. SE: nausea; diarrhoea 
(try modiﬁ ed-release version); abdominal pain; not hypoglycaemia. Avoid if eGFR 
36mL/min (due to risk lactic acidosis).
DPP4 inhibitors/gliptins: (Eg sitagliptin.) Block the action of DPP-4, an enzyme which 
destroys the hormone incretin.
Glitazone:  insulin sensitivity; SE: hypo glycaemia, fractures, ﬂ uid retention, LFT (do 
LFT every 8wks for 1yr, stop if ALT up >3-fold). CI: past or present CCF; osteoporosis; 
monitor weight, and stop if  or oedema.
Sulfonylurea:  insulin secretion; eg gliclazide 40mg/d. SE: hypoglycaemia (moni-
tor glucose); it  weight.
SGLTI: Selective sodium–glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitor. Blocks the reabsorp-
tion of glucose in the kidneys and promotes excretion of excess glucose in the 
urine (eg empagliﬂ ozin, shown to reduce mortality from cardiovascular disease in 
patients with type 2 DM, when compared to placebo).8

_OHCM_10e.indb   208

_OHCM_10e.indb   208

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

209

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Using insulin
Vital to educate to self-adjust doses in the light of exercise, ﬁ ngerprick glucose, 
calorie intake, and carbohydrate counting. •Phone support (trained nurse 7/24). 
•Can modify diet wisely and avoid binge drinking (danger of delayed hypoglycae-
mia). •Partner can abort hypoglycaemia: sugary drinks; GlucoGel® PO if coma (no 
risk of aspiration). •Dose titration to target—eg by 2–4 UNIT steps.
It is vital to write UNITS in full when prescribing insulin to avoid misinterpre-
tation of U for zero!
Subcutaneous insulins Short-, medium-, or long-acting. Strength: 100U/mL.
1      Ultra-fast acting (Humalog®; Novorapid®); inject at start of meal, or just after 
(unless sugar-laden)—helps match what is actually eaten (vs what is planned). 

2      Isophane insulin (variable peak at 4–12h): favoured by NICE (it’s cheap!).
3      Pre-mixed insulins (eg NovoMix® 30 = 30% short-acting and 70% long-acting).
4      Long-acting recombinant human insulin analogues (insulin glargine) are used 
at bedtime in type 1 or 2 DM. There is no awkward peak, so good if nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia is an issue. Caution if considering pregnancy. Insulin detemir 
is similar and has a role in intensive insulin regimens for overweight type 2 DM.
Common  insulin  regimens  Plan  the  regimen  to  suit  the  lifestyle,  not  vice 
versa. Disposable pens: dial dose; insert needle 90° to skin. Vary injection site (outer 
thigh/abdomen); change needle daily.
  • ‘BD biphasic regimen’: twice daily premixed insulins by pen (eg NovoMix 30®)—

useful in type 2 DM or type 1 with regular lifestyle.

  • ‘QDS regimen’: before meals ultra-fast insulin + bedtime long-acting analogue: 
useful in type 1 DM for achieving a ﬂ exible lifestyle (eg for adjusting doses with 
size of meals, or exercise).

  • Once-daily before-bed long-acting insulin: a good initial insulin regimen when 
switching from tablets in type 2 DM. Typical dose to work up to (slowly!): ≥1U/24h 
for every unit of BMI in adults. Consider retaining metformin (±pio glitazone) if 
needed for tight control and patient is unable to use BD regimen.

Dose adjustment for normal eating (DAFNE): Multidisciplinary teams promoting 
autonomy can save lives.  DAFNE found that training in ﬂ exible, intensive insulin 
dosing improved glycaemic control as well as well-being.9 It is resource intensive.
Subcutaneous insulin dosing during intercurrent illnesses (eg inﬂ uenza)
 Advise patients to avoid stopping insulin during acute illness.
  • Illness often increases insulin requirements despite reduced food intake.
  • Maintain calorie intake, eg using milk.
  • Check  blood  glucose  ≥ 4  times  a  day  and  look  for  ketonuria.  Increase  insulin 
doses if glucose rising. Advise to get help from a specialist diabetes nurse or GP 
if concerned (esp. if glucose levels are rising or ketonuria). One option is 2-hourly 
ultra fast-acting insulin (eg 6–8U) preceded by a ﬁ ngerprick glucose check.

  • Admit if vomiting, dehydrated, ketotic (p832), a child, or pregnant.
Insulin pumps (continous subcutaneous insulin) Consider when attempts to 
reach HbA1C with multiple daily injections have resulted in disabling hypoglycaemia 
or person has been unable to achieve target HbA1C despite careful management.

Glucagon-like peptide (GLP) analogues (exenatide, liraglutide)
Work as incretin mimetics. Incretins are gut peptides that work by aug ment ing 
insulin release. Given by subcutaneous injection. Patients must have BMI >35 and 
speciﬁ c psychological or other medical problems associated with obesity, or have 
a BMI lower than 35 kg/m2, and for whom insulin therapy would have signiﬁ cant 
occupational implications, or weight loss would beneﬁ t other signiﬁ cant obesity-
related comorbidities. To continue a GLP 1 mimetic, a person should have a bene-
ﬁ cial metabolic response (a reduction of HbA1C by at least 11mmol/mol) and a 
weight loss of at least 3% of initial body weight in 6 months.

_OHCM_10e.indb   209

_OHCM_10e.indb   209

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

210

Complications of established diabetes

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Prospective studies show that good control of hyperglycaemia is key to prevent ing 
microvascular complications in type 1 and 2 DM.10 Find out what problems are be-
ing experienced (eg glycaemic control, morale, erectile dysfunction—p230).
Assess vascular risk BP control (see BOX ‘Controlling blood pressure in diabetes’) is 
crucial for preventing macro vascular disease and mortality. Refer to smoking ces-
sation services. Check plasma lipids.
Look  for  complications  •Check  injection  sites  for  infection  or  lipohypertrophy 
(fatty change): advise on rotating sites of injection if present.
  • Vascular disease: Chief cause of death. MI is 4-fold commoner in DM and is more 
likely to be ‘silent’. Stroke is twice as common. Women are at high risk—DM re-
moves the vascular advantage conferred by the female sex. Address other risk 
factors—diet, smoking, hypertension (p93). Suggest a statin (eg atorvastatin 20mg 
nocte) for all, even if no overt IHD, vascular disease, or micro albuminuria. Aspirin 
75mg reduces vascular events (in context of secondary prevention). Safe to use in 
diabetic retinopathy.11

  • Nephropathy:  (p314.)  Microalbuminuria  is  when  urine  dipstick  is  Ωve  for  protein 
but the urine albumin:creatinine ratio (UA:CR) is 3mg/mmol (units vary, check lab) 
reﬂ ecting  early  renal  disease  and  vascular  risk.  If  UA:CR  >3,  inhibiting  the  renin–
angiotensin system with an ACE-i or sartan, even if BP is normal, protects the kidneys. 
Spironolactone may also help.12 Refer if UA:CR >7 ± GFR falling by >5mL/min/1.73m2/yr.13
  • Diabetic retinopathy: Blindness is preventable. Annual retinal screening man-
datory  for  all  patients. Refer to an ophthalmologist if pre-proliferative changes 
or if any uncertainty at or near the macula (the only place capable of 6/6 vision). 
Pre-symptomatic screening enables laser photocoagulation to be used, aimed to 
stop production of angiogenic factors from the ischaemic retina. Indications: macu-
lopathy or proliferative retinopathy. See ﬁ gs 5.6–5.9.

  • Background retinopathy: Microaneurysms (dots), haemorrhages (blots), and 
hard exud ates (lipid deposits). Refer if near the macula, eg for intravitreal tri-
amcinolone. 

  • Pre-proliferative retinopathy: Cotton-wool spots (eg infarcts), haemorrhag-
es, venous beading. These are signs of retinal ischaemia. Refer to a specialist.

  • Proliferative retinopathy: New vessels form. Needs urgent referral.
  • Maculopathy:  (Hard  to  see  in  early  stages.)  Suspect  if  acuity.  Prompt 
laser,  intra vitreal  steroids,  or  anti-angiogenic  agents  may  be  needed  in 
macular  oedema.   Pathogenesis:  Capillary  endothelial  change  vascular 
leak  microaneurysms  capillary  occlusion  local  hypoxia  + 
ischae-
mia  new  vessel  formation.  High  retinal  blood  ﬂ ow  caused  by  hypergly-
caemia  (and  BP  and  pregnancy)  triggers  this,  causing  capillary  pericyte 
damage. Microvascular occlusion causes cotton-wool spots (± blot haemor-
rhages  at  interfaces  with  perfused  retina). New  vessels  form  on  the  disc 
or  ischaemic  areas,  proliferate,  bleed,  ﬁ brose,  and  can  detach  the  retina. 
Aspirin2 (2mg/kg/d) may be recommended by ophthalmologists; there is no 
evidence that it  bleeding.

  • Cataracts:  May  be  juvenile  ‘snowﬂ ake’  form,  or  ‘senile’—which  occur  earlier  in 
diabetic subjects. Osmotic changes in the lens induced in acute hyperglycaemia 
reverse with normoglycaemia (so wait before buying glasses).

  • Rubeosis iridis: New vessels on iris: occurs late and may lead to glaucoma.
  • Metabolic complications: p832.
  • Diabetic feet: p212.
  • Neuropathy: p212.

2  As DM has so many vascular events, particularly encourage statin use (p690), esp. if LDL >3mmol/L or systolic 
BP >140. Even consider a statin whatever the pre-treatment cholesterol; discuss with your patient.

_OHCM_10e.indb   210

_OHCM_10e.indb   210

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Controlling blood pressure in diabetes
Type 1 DM: Treat BP if >135/85mmHg, unless albuminuria or two or more features 
of metabolic syndrome, in which case it should be 130/80mmHg (NICE 2015). Use an 
ACE-i 1st line or angiotension receptor antagonist if intolerant. If hypertensive and 
underlying renal involvement, see local guidance, p304.
Type 2 DM: Target BP <140/80mmHg or <130/80mmHg if kidney, eye, or cerebrovas-
cular damage. 1st-line drug treatment should be an ACE-i, except in those of Afri-
can or Caribbean origin, where ACE-i plus diuretic or a calcium-channel antagonist 
(CCA) should be started. For pregnant women off er CCA. Do not off er aspirin for the 
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease to adults with type 1 DM (NICE 2015). 
Don’t combine an ACE-i with an angiotension receptor antagonist.

211

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.6  Background retinopathy, with micro-
aneurysms and hard exudates.

Fig  5.7  Pre-proliferative  retinopathy,  with 
haemorrhages and a cotton-wool spot.

Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.

Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig  5.8  Proliferative  retinopathy,  with  new 
vessel formation and haemorrhages.

Fig 5.9  Scars from previous laser photocoagu-
lation.

Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.

Courtesy of Prof J Trobe.

Improving quality of life: going beyond the pleasures of the ﬂ esh
‘I cannot eat what I want because of your pitiful diet. Sex is out because diabetes 
has made me impotent. Smoking is banned, so what’s left? I’d shoot myself if 
only I could see straight.’ Start by acknowledging your patient’s distress. Don’t 
shrug it off —but don’t take it at face value either. Life may be transformed by 
cataract surgery, sildenaﬁ l (unless contraindicated, p230), dietary negotiation, and 
sport  (it  needn’t  be  shooting).  Take  steps  to  simplify  care.  Stop  blood  glucose 
self-monitoring if it’s achieving nothing (known to  quality of life). Even if all these 
interventions fail, you have one trump card up your sleeve: ‘Let’s both try to ﬁ nd 
one new thing of value before we next meet—and compare notes’. This opens the 
way to vicarious pleasure: a whole new world.

_OHCM_10e.indb   211

_OHCM_10e.indb   211

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

212

Diabetic neuropathy and diabetic foot care

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Refer early to foot services (podiatry, imaging, vascular surgery).
Amputations  are  common  (135/week)—and  preventable:  good  care  saves  legs. 
Examine feet regularly. Distinguish between ischaemia (critical toes ± absent foot 
pulses and worse outcome) and peripheral neuropathy (injury or infection over pres-
sure points, eg the metatarsal heads). In practice, many have both.
Neuropathy Sensation in ‘stocking’ distribution: test sensation with a 10g mono-
ﬁ lament ﬁ bre (sensory loss is patchy so examine all areas), absent ankle jerks, neuro-
pathic deformity (Charcot joint, ﬁ g 5.11): pes cavus, claw toes, loss of transverse arch, 
rocker-bottom sole. Caused by loss of pain sensation, leading to mech anical stress 
and repeated joint injury. Swelling, instability, and deformity. Early recognition is 
vital (cellulitis or osteomyelitis are often misdiagnosed).
Ischaemia If the foot pulses cannot be felt, do Doppler pressure measurements. 
Any  evidence  of  neuropathy  or  vascular  disease  raises  risk  of  foot  ulceration. 
Educate (daily foot inspection—eg with a mirror for the sole; comfortable shoes). 
Regular chiropody to remove callus, as haemorrhage and tissue necrosis may oc-
cur below, leading to ulceration. Treat fungal infections (p408). Surgery (including 
endovascular angioplasty balloons, stents, and subintimal recanalization) has a role.
Foot ulceration Typically painless, punched-out ulcer (ﬁ g 5.10) in an area of thick 
callus ± superadded infection. Causes cellulitis, abscess ± osteomyelitis.
Assess degree of:
1 Neuropathy (clinically).
2 Ischaemia (clinically + Doppler ± angiography).
3 Bony deformity, eg Charcot joint (clinically + X-ray). See ﬁ g 5.11.
4 Infection (swabs, blood culture, X-ray for osteomyelitis, probe ulcer to reveal depth).
Management: Regular chiropody. Bed rest ± therapeutic shoes. For Charcot joints: 
bed  rest/crutches/total  contact  cast  until  oedema  and  local  warmth  reduce  and 
bony repair is complete (8wks). Bisphosphonates may help. Charcot joints are also 
seen in tabes dorsalis, spina biﬁ da, syringomyelia, and leprosy. Metatarsal head sur-
gery may be needed. If there is cellulitis, admit for IV antibiotics. Common organ-
isms: staphs, streps, anaerobes. Start empirically (as per your local guidance) with 
benzylpenicillin 1.2g/6h IV and ﬂ ucloxacillin 1g/6h IV ± metronidazole 500mg/8h IV. 
IV insulin may improve healing. Get surgical help early. The degree of peripheral vas-
cular disease, general health, and patient request will determine degree of vascular 
reconstruction/surgery.
 Absolute indications for surgery: Abscess or deep infection; spreading anaerobic 
infection; gangrene/rest pain; suppurative arthritis.
Diabetic  neuropathies  Symmetric  sensory  polyneuropathy:  (‘glove  &  stocking’ 
numbness, tingling, and pain, eg worse at night). : paracetamol  tricyclic (ami-
triptyline 10–25mg nocte; gradually  to 150mg)  duloxetine, gabapentin, or prega-
balin  opiates. Avoiding weight-bearing helps.  Mononeuritis multiplex: (eg III & VI 
cranial nerves). Treatment: hard! If sudden or sev ere, immunosuppression may help 
(corticosteroids,  IV  immunoglobulin,  ciclosporin).  Amyotrophy:  Painful  wasting  of 
quadriceps and other pelvifemoral muscles. Use electrophysiology to show, eg lum-
bosacral radiculopathy, plexopathy, or proximal crural neuropathy. Natural course: 
variable with gradual but often incomplete improvement. IV immunoglobulins have 
been used. Autonomic neuropathy: (p505) Postural BP drop; cerebro vascular au-
toregulation; loss of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (vagal neuropathy); gastroparesis; 
urine retention; erectile dysfunction; gustatory sweating; diarrhoea (may respond 
to codeine phosphate). Gastroparesis (early satiety, post-prandial bloating, nausea/
vomiting) is diagnosed by gastric scintigraphy with a  99tech netium-labelled meal; 
anti-emetics, erythromycin, or gastric pacing. Postural hypotens ion may respond to 
ﬂ udrocortisone (SE: oedema, BP)/midodrine (-agonist; SE: BP).

_OHCM_10e.indb   212

_OHCM_10e.indb   212

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Preventing loss of limbs: primary or secondary prevention?
Traditionally prevention involves foot care advice in diabetic clinics (eg ‘Don’t go 
bare-foot’), promoting euglycaemia and normotension. But despite this, the sight 
of a diabetic patient minus one limb is not rare, and must prompt us to redouble 
our commitment to primary prevention, ie stopping those at risk from ever getting 
diabetes. The sequelae of diabetic neuropathy can lead to gangrene, amputation, 
and the impact on quality of life can be profound. As one patient post amputation 
said, ‘I begin again to walk, on crutches. What nuisance, what fatigue, what sad-
ness, when I think about all my ancient travels, and how active I was just 5 months 
ago! Where are the runnings across mountains, the walks, the deserts, the rivers, 
and the seas? And now, the life of a legless cripple. For I begin to understand that 
crutches, wooden and articulated legs, are a pack of jokes…Goodbye to family, 
goodbye to future! My life is gone, I’m no more than an immobile trunk’ (Arthur 
Rimbaud. Letter to his sister Isabelle, 10 July 1891).

213

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.10  Gangrene (toes 2, 4, and 5).

Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford 
Textbook of Medicine, 2010, with per-
mission from Oxford University Press.

Fig 5.11  Charcot (neuropathic) joint.
Reproduced from Warrell et al, Oxford 
Textbook of Medicine, 2010, with per-
mission from Oxford University Press.

Special situations in diabetes
Pregnancy: (OHCS p23) 4% are complicated by DM: either pre-existing (<0.5%), or 
new-onset gestational diabetes (GDM) (>3.5%).
  • All forms carry an increased risk to mother and fetus: miscarriage, pre-term 
labour, pre-eclampsia, congenital malformations, macrosomia, and a worsening 
of diabetic complications, eg retinopathy, nephropathy.

  • Risk of GDM  if: aged over 25; family history; +ve; weight; non-Caucasian; HIV+ve; 

previous gestational DM.

  • Pre-conception: off er general advice, and discuss risks. Control/reduce weight, 

aim for good glucose control, off er folic acid 5mg/d until 12 weeks.

  • Screen for GDM with OGTT if risk factors at booking (16–18 weeks if previous GDM).
  • Oral hypoglycaemics other than metformin should be discontinued. Metformin 

may be used as an adjunct or alternative to insulin in type 2 DM or GDM.

6wks postpartum, do a fasting glucose. Even if Ωve, 50% go on to develop DM.
Surgery: Optimal blood sugar control pre, peri, and post operatively is important 
to minimize risk of infection and balance catabolic response to surgery. Type 1 
diabetics should ideally be ﬁ rst on the list and BMS should have been stabilized 1–2 
days pre major surgery. Consult local policy for how to manage insulin-treated/
non-insulin-treated patients on morning of surgery (eg setting up glucose/insulin 
infusion).
Acute  illness: Diabetics are prone to hyperglycaemia during periods of illness, 
in spite of reduced oral intake. Avoid stopping insulin in periods of acute illness.

_OHCM_10e.indb   213

_OHCM_10e.indb   213

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

214

Hypoglycaemia

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

 Hypoglycaemia Commonest endocrine emergency—see p834. Prompt diagnosis 
and treatment essential—brain damage & death can occur if severe or prolonged. 
Deﬁ nition  Plasma  glucose  3mmol/L.  Threshold  for  symptoms  varies.  See  BOX. 
Symptoms Autonomic:  Sweating, anxiety, hunger, tremor, palpitations, dizziness. 
Neuroglycopenic: Confusion, drowsiness, visual trouble, seizures, coma. Rarely fo-
cal symptoms, eg transient hemiplegia. Mutism, personality change, restlessness, 
and incoherence may lead to misdiagnosis of alcohol intoxication or even psychosis. 
Fasting hypoglycaemia Causes: The chief cause is insulin or sulfonylurea treatment 
in a diabetic, eg activity, missed meal, accidental or non-accidental overdose (check 
for ciculating oral hypoglycaemics). In non-diabetics you must EXPLAIN mechanism:
Exogenous drugs, eg insulin, oral hypoglycaemics (p208)? access through diabetic 
in the family? Body-builders may misuse insulin to help stamina. Also: alcohol, eg a 
binge with no food; aspirin poisoning; ACE-i; -blockers; pentamidine; quinine sulfate; 
aminoglutethamide; insulin-like growth factor.14

Pituitary insuffi  ciency.
Liver failure, plus some rare inherited enzyme defects.
Addison’s disease.
Islet  cell  tumours  (insulinoma)  and  immune  hypoglycaemia  (eg  anti-insulin
receptor antibodies in Hodgkin’s disease).
Non-pancreatic neoplasms, eg ﬁ brosarcomas and haem angiopericytomas.

When to investigate:
  •  Whipple answered this (Whipple’s triad): symptoms or signs of hypoglycemia + 

plasma glucose + resolution of symptoms or signs post glucose rise.

  • Document BM during attack and lab glucose if in hospital (monitors often not reli-

able at low readings).

  • Take a drug history and exclude liver failure.
  • 72h fasting may be needed (monitor closely). Bloods: glucose, insulin,  C-peptide, 
and plasma ketones if symptomatic. If endogenous hyperinsulinism suspected, do 
insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, -hydroxybutyrate.

Interpreting results:
  • Hypoglycaemic hyperinsulinaemia (HH): Causes: insulinoma, sulfonylureas, insulin 
injection (no detectable C-peptide—only released with endogenous insulin); non-
insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syndrome, mutation in the insulin-re-
ceptor gene. Congenital HH follows mutations in genes involved in insulin secretion 
(ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, CGK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A, ABCC8, & KCNJ11).15

  • Insulin low or undetectable, no excess ketones. Causes: non-pancreatic neoplasm; 

anti-insulin receptor antibodies.

  • Insulin, ketones. Causes: alcohol, pituitary insuffi  ciency, Addison’s disease.
Post-prandial hypoglycaemia May occur after gastric/bariatric surgery (‘dump-
ing’, p623), and in type 2 DM. Investigation: Prolonged OGTT (5h, p206).
Treatment See p834. If episodes are often, advise many small high-starch meals. 
If post-prandial glucose, give slowly absorbed carbohydrate (high ﬁ bre). In diabet-
ics, rationalize insulin therapy (p209).

The deﬁ nition of hypoglycaemia is context-dependent
The brain stops working if plasma glucose levels get too low, so we are nervous 
of levels 3mmol/L. But some are asymptomatic at this level. So what is deﬁ nitely 
abnormal? The answer may be 4mmol/L, allowing for inaccuracies in ﬁ ngerprick 
BMS (NB: whole blood glucose is 10–15% < plasma glucose.) Think: ‘In this ill patient 
when can I be sure that a low glucose is not cont ributing to their illness?’ 
If <4mmol/L, you may be wise to treat (p834)—just in case. Consider, is the pa-
tient  on  hypoglycaemics,  have  they  binged  on  alcohol  24hrs  pre  test?  Skipped 
meals? Is there an underlying illness, eg insulinoma? Unlikely, but possible. Keep 
an open mind; let the GP know. Counsel patient and relative about warning signs 
of hypoglycaemia. Be more inclined to investigate if the eff ects of even mild hypo-
glycaemia might be disastrous (eg in pilots) or if there are unexplained symptoms.

_OHCM_10e.indb   214

_OHCM_10e.indb   214

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

215

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Insulinoma

This often benign (90–95%) pancreatic islet cell tumour is sporadic or seen with MEN-1 
(p223). It presents as fasting hypoglycaemia, with Whipple’s triad:

1      Sym ptoms associated with fasting or exercise.
2      Recorded hypoglycaemia with symptoms.
3      Symptoms relieved with glucose.

Screening test Hypoglycaemia + plasma insulin during a long fast.
Suppressive tests Give IV insulin and measure C-peptide. Normally exogenous insu-
lin suppresses C-peptide production, but this does not occur in insulinoma.
Imaging CT/MRI ± endoscopic pancreatic US ± IACS (see BOX; all fallible, so don’t waste 
too much time before proceeding to intra-operative visualization ± intra-operative ul-
trasound). 18F-L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine PET-CT can help guide laparoscopic surgery.
Treatment Excision.
Nesidioblastosis See BOX. If this doesn’t work, options are: diet, diazoxide, dextrose 
IVI, enteral feeding, everolimus.
 Diabetic ketoacidosis Results from insulin deﬁ ciency (eg unknown diagnosis, 
intercurrent illness, interuption of insulin therapy). See p832.

Pursuing a voyage to the islets of Langerhans to the bitter end
A  50-year-old  had  episodic  early-morning  sweats  and  tremors  and  was  found 
to  have  hyperinsulinaemic  hypoglycaemia  (= Nesidioblastosis).  Selective  intra-
arterial calcium infusions (IACS) showed a 2-fold increase in insulin secretion after 
infusion of the splenic and superior mesenteric arteries, so setting the stage for 
‘hunt the insulinoma’.

But cross-sectional imaging and endoscopic ultrasound were normal. At lapa-
rotomy, no lesion was found despite mobilization of the pancreas, or during intra-
operative ultrasound. ‘Time to sew up and go home?’ ‘No!’ said the surgeon, ‘I’m 
going to do a distal pancreatectomy’. Histology showed no discrete insulinoma, 
but diff use islet cell hyper plasia (nesidioblastosis).  How much pancreas to resect? 
Too little and nothing is gained: too much spells pancreatic endocrine disaster. 
Luckily the surgeon guessed right, and the patient was cured by the procedure.16

_OHCM_10e.indb   215

_OHCM_10e.indb   215

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

216

Thyroid function tests (TFTs)

Physiology
Thyroid-stimulating  hormone  (TSH=thyro tropin),  a  glycoprotein,  is  produced  from 
the anterior pituitary (ﬁ g 5.12). The thyroid produces mainly T4, which is 5-fold less 
active than T3. 85% of T3 is formed from peripheral conversion of T4. Most T3 and T4 
in plasma is protein bound, eg to thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG). The unbound por-
tion is the active part. T3 and T4 cell metabolism, via nuclear receptors, and are thus 
vital for growth and mental development. They also catecholamine eff ects. Thyroid 
hormone abnormalities are usually due to problems in the thyroid gland itself, and 
rarely caused by the hypothalamus or the anterior pituitary.

TRH from the hypothalamus acts on the pituitary gland

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.12  Pathways involved in thyroid function.

Basic tests See table 5.2. Free T4 and T3 are more useful than total T4 and T3 as the 
latter are aff ected by TBG. Total T4 and T3 are  when TBG is  and vice versa. TBG is  
in pregnancy, oestrogen therapy (HRT, oral contraceptives), and hepatitis. TBG is  in 
nephrotic syndrome and malnutrition (both from protein loss), drugs (androgens, 
cortico steroids, phenytoin), chronic liver disease, and acromegaly. TSH is very useful:
  • Hyperthyroidism suspected: Ask for T3, T4, and TSH. All will have TSH (except the 
rare TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma). Most have T4, but ~1% have only raised T3.
  • Hypothyroidism suspected or monitoring replacement : Ask for only T4 and 
TSH. T3 does not add any extra information. TSH varies through the day: trough at 
2PM; 30% higher during darkness, so during monitoring, try to do at the same time.
Sick euthyroidism: In any systemic illness, TFTS may become deranged. The typical 
pattern is for ‘everything to be low’. The test should be repeated after recovery.
Assay interference is caused by antibodies in the serum, interfering with the test.
Other tests
  • Thyroid autoantibodies: Antithyroid peroxidase (TPO; formerly called microsomal) 
antibodies or antithyro globulin antibodies may be increased in autoimmune thy-
roid disease: Hashimoto’s or Graves’ disease. If +ve in Graves’, there is an increased 
risk of developing hypothyroidism at a later stage.

  • TSH receptor antibody: May be  in Graves’ disease (useful in pregnancy).
  • Serum thyroglobulin: Useful in monitoring the treatment of carcinoma (p600), and 

in detection of factitious (self-medicated) hyperthyroidism, where it is low.

  • Ultrasound: This distinguishes cystic (usually, but not always, benign) from solid 
(possibly malignant) nodules. If a solitary (or dominant) large nodule, in a multi nod-
ular goitre, do a ﬁ ne-needle aspiration to look for thyroid cancer; see ﬁ g 13.23, p601.
  • Isotope scan: (123Iodine, 99technetium pertechnetate, etc; see ﬁ g 13.22, p601.) Useful 
for determining the cause of hyperthyroidism and to detect retrosternal goitre, ec-
topic thyroid tissue or thyroid metastases (+ whole body CT). If there are suspicious 
nodules, the question is: does the area have increased (hot), decreased (cold), or the 
same (neutral) uptake of isotope as the remaining thyroid (see ﬁ g 5.13). Few neu-
tral and almost no hot nodules are malignant. 20% of ‘cold’ nodules are malignant. 
Surgery is most likely to be needed if: •rapid growth •compression signs •dominant 
nodule on scintigraphy •nodule 3cm •hypo-echogenicity. See also p738.

_OHCM_10e.indb   216

_OHCM_10e.indb   216

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Screen the following for abnormalities in thyroid function
  • Patients with atrial ﬁ brillation.
  • Patients with hyperlipidaemia (4–14% have hypothyroidism).
  • Diabetes mellitus—on annual review.
  • Women  with  type  1  DM during  1st  trimester  and  post  delivery  (3-fold  rise  in 

217

incidence of postpartum thyroid dysfunction).
  • Patients on amiodarone or lithium (6 monthly).
  • Patients with Down’s or Turner’s syndrome, or Addison’s disease (yearly).
Table 5.2  Interpreting TFTS
Hormone proﬁ le
TSH, T4
TSH, normal T4
TSH, T4
TSH, T4 and T3

Diagnosis
Hypothyroidism
Treated hypothyroidism or subclinical hypo thyroidism (p221)
TSH-secreting tumour or thyroid hormone resistance
Slow conversion of T4 to T3 (deiodinase deﬁ ciency; euthyroid 
hyperthyroxinaemia*) or thyroid hormone antibody artefact
Hyperthyroidism

TSH, T4 or T3
TSH, normal T4 and T3 Subclinical hyperthyroidism
TSH, T4
TSH, T4 and T3
Normal TSH, 
abnormal T4
*In ‘consumptive hypothyroidism’ deiodinase activity is ; suspect if thyroxine doses have to be .

Central hypothyroidism (hypothalamic or pituitary disorder)
Sick euthyroidism or pituitary disease
Consider changes in thyroid-binding globulin, assay inter-
ference, amiodarone, or pituitary TSH tumour

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.13  The images are from an isotope scan, with and without markers placed over the ster-
nal notch. We can see on the left that the nodule is metabolically inactive (‘cold’). The hot nod-
ule (right pair) is a very avid nodule causing background thyroid suppression.

Image courtesy of Dr Y. T. Huang.

_OHCM_10e.indb   217

_OHCM_10e.indb   217

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
218

Thyrotoxicosis

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

The clinical eff ect of excess thyroid hormone, usually from gland hyperfunction.
Symptoms Diarrhoea; weight; appetite (if , paradoxical weight gain in 10%); 
over-active; sweats; heat intolerance; palpitations; tremor; irritability; labile emotions; 
oligo menorrhoea ± infertility. Rarely psychosis; chorea; panic; itch; alopecia; urticaria.
Signs Pulse fast/irregular (AF or SVT; VT rare);  warm moist skin; ﬁ ne tremor; pal-
mar erythema; thin hair; lid lag; lid retraction (exposure of sclera above iris; caus-
ing ‘stare’, (ﬁ g 5.14; eyelid lags behind eye’s descent as pat ient watches your ﬁ nger 
descend slowly). There may be goitre (ﬁ g 5.15); thyroid nodules; or bruit depending 
on the cause. Signs of Graves’ disease: 1 Eye disease (BOX ‘Thyroid eye disease’): 
exoph th almos,  ophthalmoplegia.  2  Pretibial  myxoedema:  oedematous  swellings 
above lateral malleoli: the term myxoedema is confusing here. 3 Thyroid acropachy: 
extreme manifestation, with clubbing, painful ﬁ nger and toe swelling, and periosteal 
reaction in limb bones.
Tests TSH (suppressed), T4, and T3. There may be mild normocytic anaemia, mild neu-
tropenia (in Graves’), ESR, Ca2+, LFT. Also: Check thyroid autoantibodies. Isotope scan 
if the cause is unclear, to detect nodular disease or subacute thyroiditis. If ophthal-
mopathy, test visual ﬁ elds, acuity, and eye move ments (see BOX ‘Thyroid eye disease’).
Causes
Graves’ disease: Prevalence: 0.5% (⅔ of cases of hyperthyroidism). : ≈9:1. Typical 
age: 40–60yrs (younger if maternal family history). Cause: circulating IgG autoan-
tibodies binding to and activating G-protein-coupled thyrotropin receptors, which 
cause smooth thyroid enlargement and hormone production (esp.  T3), and react 
with orbital autoantigens. Triggers: stress; infection; childbirth. Patients are often 
hyperthyroid but may be, or become, hypo- or euthyroid. It is associated with other 
autoimmune diseases: vitiligo, type 1 DM, Addison’s (table 5.3).
Toxic multinodular goitre: Seen in the elderly and in iodine-deﬁ cient areas. There 
are nodules that secrete thyroid hormones. Surgery is indicated for compressive 
symptoms from the enlarged thyroid (dysphagia or dyspnoea). 
Toxic adenoma: There is a solitary nodule producing T3 and T4. On isotope scan, the 
nodule is ‘hot’ (p216), and the rest of the gland is suppressed.
Ectopic thyroid tissue: Metastatic follicular thyroid cancer, or struma ovarii: ovar-
ian teratoma with thyroid tissue.
Exogenous: Iodine excess, eg food contamination, cont rast media (thyroid storm, 
p834, if already hyperthyroid). Levothyroxine excess causes T4, T3, thyro globulin.
Others: 1 Subacute de Quervain’s thyroiditis: self-limiting post-viral with painful 
goitre, T° ± ESR. Low isotope uptake on scan. : NSAIDS. 2 Drugs: amiodarone (p220), 
lithium (hypothyroidism more common). 3 Postpartum. 4 TB (rare). 
Treatment

1      Drugs: -blockers (eg propranolol 40mg/6h) for rapid control of symptoms. Anti-
thyroid medication: two strategies (equally eff ective):17 A Titration, eg carbim azole 
20–40mg/24h PO for 4wks, reduce according to TFTs every 1–2 months. B Block-
replace: Give carbimazole + levothyroxine simultaneously (less risk of iatrogenic 
hypothyroidism). In Graves’, maintain on either regimen for  12–18 months then 
withdraw.  ~50%  will  relapse,  requiring  radioiodine  or  surgery.  Carbimazole  SE: 
agranulocytosis ( neutrophils, can lead to dangerous sepsis; rare (0.03%)); warn 
to stop and get an urgent FBC if signs of infection, eg T°, sore throat/mouth ulcers.
2      Radioiodine ( 131I): Most become hypothyroid post-treatment. There is no evi-
dence for cancer, birth defects, or infertility in women. CI: pregnancy, lactation. 
Caution in active hyperthyroidism as risk of thyroid storm (p835).

3      Thyroidectomy (usually total): Carries a risk of damage to recurrent laryngeal 
nerve (hoarse voice) and hypoparathyroidism. Patients will become hypothyroid, 
so thyroid replacement needed.

4      In pregnancy and infancy: Get expert help. See OHCS p24 & OHCS p182.
Complications Heart failure (thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy,  in elderly), angina,  AF 
(seen  in  10–25%:  control  hyperthyroidism  and  war farinize  if  no  contraindication), 
osteoporosis, ophthalmopathy, gynaecomastia. Thyroid storm (p835).

_OHCM_10e.indb   218

_OHCM_10e.indb   218

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

219

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Thyroid eye disease
Seen in 25–50% of people with Graves’ disease. The main known risk factor is 
smoking. The eye disease may not correlate with thyroid disease and the patient 
can be euthyroid, hypothyroid, or hyperthyroid at presentation. Eye disease may 
be the ﬁ rst presenting sign of Graves’ disease, and can also be worsened by treat-
ment, typically with radioiodine (usually a transient eff ect). Retro-orbital inﬂ am-
mation and lymphocyte inﬁ ltration results in swelling of the orbit.
Symptoms Eye discomfort, grittiness, tear production, photophobia, diplopia, 
acuity, aff erent pupillary defect (p72) may mean optic nerve compression: Seek 
expert advice at once as decompression may be needed. Nerve damage does not 
necessarily go hand-in-hand with protrusion. Indeed, if the eye cannot protrude 
for anatomical reasons, optic nerve compression is more likely—a paradox!
Signs  Exophthalmos—appearance  of  protruding  eye;  proptosis—eyes  protrude 
beyond the orbit (look from above in the same plane as the forehead); conjunctival 
oedema; corneal ulceration; papilloedema; loss of colour vision. Ophth almoplegia 
(especially of upward gaze) occurs due to muscle swelling and ﬁ brosis.
Tests Diagnosis is clinical. CT/MRI of the orbits may reveal enlarged eye muscles.
Management Get specialist help. Treat hyper- or hypothyroidism. Advise to stop 
smoking (worse prognosis).  Most have mild disease that can be treated sympto-
matically (artiﬁ cial tears, sunglasses, avoid dust, elevate bed when sleeping to 
periorbital oedema). Diplopia may be managed with a Fresnel prism stuck to one 
lens of a spectacle (aids easy changing as the exophthalmos changes). In more se-
vere disease, try high-dose steroids (IV methylprednisolone is better than predniso-
lone 100mg/day PO)18—decreasing according to symptoms. Surgical decomp ression 
is used for severe sight-threatening disease, or for cosmetic reasons once the activ-
ity of eye disease has reduced (via an inferior orbital approach, using space in the 
ethmoidal, sphenoidal, and maxillary sinuses). Eyelid surgery may improve cosmesis 
and function. Orbital radiotherapy can be used to treat ophthalmoplegia but has lit-
tle eff ect on proptosis. Future options: Anti-TNF antibodies (eg inﬂ iximab).

Fig  5.14  Thyroid  eye  dis-
ease: lid retraction causing a 
‘staring’ appearance.

Fig 5.15  Goitre.

Causes of goitre
Diffuse
  • Physiological
  • Graves’ disease
  • Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
  • Subacute (de Quervain’s) 

thyroiditis (painful).

Nodular
  • Multinodular goitre
  • Adenoma
  • Carcinoma.

Table 5.3  Manifestations of Graves’ disease—and pathophysiology
Suppressed TSH
Pituitary
Rate; contractility
Heart
Peripheral T3; LDL (p690)
Liver
Bone
Bone turnover; osteoporosis
Genital  Libido; erectile dysfunction
Genital 
Metabolic
White fat

Expression of thyrotropin  subunit
Serum atrial natriuretic peptide
Type 1 5’-deiodinase; LDL receptors
Osteocalcin; ALP; urinary N-telopeptide
Sex hormone globulin; testosterone
Oestrogen antagonism
Fatty acid oxidation; Na-K ATPase
Adrenergic-mediated lipolysis

Irregular menses
Thermogenesis; O2 use
Fat mass
Stiff  person syndrome (rare)* Antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase
Proximal myopathy
Secretion of T3 and T4

Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-activated ATPase
Type 2 5’-deiodinase activity in thyroid

CNS 
Muscle
Thyroid

*Emotional or tactile stimuli cause spasms; seen in any autoimmune state (eg type 1 DM); : baclofen± IV Ig.

_OHCM_10e.indb   219

_OHCM_10e.indb   219

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

220

Hypothyroidism (myxoedema)

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

The clinical eff ect of lack of thyroid hormone. It is common (4/1000/yr). If treated, 
prognosis is excellent; untreated it is disastrous (eg heart disease, dementia). As 
it is insidious, both you and your patient may not realize anything is wrong, so be 
alert to subtle, non-speciﬁ c symptoms, esp. in women 40yrs old (: ≈ 6:1).
Symptoms Tiredness; sleepy, lethargic; mood; cold-disliking; weight; constip ation; 
men  orrhagia; hoarse voice; memory/cognition; dementia; myalgia; cramps; weakness.
Signs  BRADYCARDIC;  reﬂ exes  relax  slowly;  ataxia  (cerebellar);  dry  thin  hair/skin; 
yawn  ing/drowsy/coma (p834); cold hands ± T°; ascites ± non-pitting oedema (lids; 
hands; feet) ± peri cardial or pleural eff usion; round puff y face/double chin/obese; de-
feated demeanour; immobile ± ileus; CCF. Also: neuropathy; myopathy; goitre (ﬁ g 5.16).
Diagnosis (p216) Have a low threshold for doing TFTs! TSH (eg ≥4mU/L);3 T4 (in rare 
secondary hypothyroidism: T4 and TSH or  due to lack from the pituitary, p232). 
Cholesterol and triglyceride; macrocytosis (less often normochromic anaemia too).
Causes of primary autoimmune hypothyroidism
  • Primary atrophic hypothyroidism: :≈6:1. Common. Diff use lymphocytic inﬁ lt-

ration of the thyroid, leading to atrophy, hence no goitre.

  • Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis: Goitre due to lympho cytic and plasma cell inﬁ ltration. 
Commoner in women aged 60–70yrs. May be hypothyroid or euthyroid; rarely initial 
period of hyper thyroid (‘Hashitoxicosis’). Autoantibody titres are very high.

Other causes of primary hypothyrodism
World-wide the chief cause is iodine deﬁ ciency.
  • Post-thyroidectomy or radioiodine treatment.
  • Drug-induced: Antithyroid drugs, amiodarone, lithium, iodine.
  • Subacute thyroiditis: Temporary hypothyroidism after hyperthyroid phase.
Secondary hypothyroidism Not enough TSH (due to hypopituitarism); very rare.
Hypothyroidism’s associations Autoimmune is seen with other autoimmune dis-
eases (type 1 DM, Addison’s, and PA, p334). Turner’s and Down’s syndromes, cystic 
ﬁ brosis, primary biliary cholangitis, ovarian hyperstimulation (OHCS p311);  POEMS syn-
drome—poly neuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, m-protein band (plasma-
cytoma) + skin pigmentation/tethering. Genetic: Dyshormonogenesis: genetic (often 
autosomal recessive) defect in hormone synthesis, eg Pendred’s syndrome (with deaf-
ness): there is uptake on isotope scan, which is displaced by potassium perchlorate.
Pregnancy problems Eclamp sia, anaemia, prematurity, birthweight, stillbirth, PPH.
Treatment
  • Healthy  and  young:  Levothyroxine  (T4),  0–100mcg/24h  PO;  review  at  12wks.  Ad-
just 6-weekly by clinical state and to normalize but not suppress TSH (keep  TSH 
>0.5mU/L). Thyroxine’s t½ is ~7d, so wait ~4wks before checking  TSH to see if a 
dose change is right. NB: small changes in serum free T4 have a logarithmic eff ect 
on  TSH. Once  normal,  check  TSH  yearly.  Enzyme  inducers  (p689)  metabolism  of 
levothyroxine.

  • Elderly or ischaemic heart disease: Start with 25mcg/24h; dose by 25mcg/4wks 

according to TSH (cautiously, as levothyroxine may precipitate angina or MI).
  • If diagnosis is in question and T4 already given: Stop T4; recheck TSH in 6 weeks.
Amiodarone An iodine-rich drug structurally like T4 ; 2% of users will get signiﬁ -
cant thyroid problems from it. Hypothyroidism can be caused by toxicity from io-
dine excess (T4 release is inhibited). Thyrotoxicosis may be caused by a destructive 
thyroiditis causing hormone release. Here, radioiodine uptake can be undetectable 
and if this is the case, glucocorticoids may help. Get expert help. Thyroidectomy 
may be needed if amiodarone cannot be discontinued. T ½ of amiodarone ≈80d, so 
problems persist after withdrawal. If on amiodarone, check TFTS 6-monthly.
Myxoedema coma The ultimate hypothyroid state before death. See p834.

3  Treat the patient not the blood level! No exact cut-off  in TSH can be given partly because risk of death 
from heart disease mirrors TSH even when in the normal range in women. Risk ≈ 1.4 if TSH 1.5–2.4 vs 1.7 if TSH 
2.5–3.5. If TSH >3.65 and possibly symptomatic, a low dose of levothyroxine may be tried.  Monitor symptoms, 
TSH and T4 carefully. Over-exposure to thyroxine may cause osteoporosis ± AF.

_OHCM_10e.indb   220

_OHCM_10e.indb   220

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

221

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Why are symptoms of thyroid disease so various, and so subtle?
Almost all our cell nuclei have receptors showing a high affi  nity for T3: that known 
as TR-1 is abundant in muscle and fat; TR-2 is abundant in brain; and TR-1 is 
abundant in brain, liver, and kidney. These receptors, via their inﬂ uence on various 
enzymes, aff ect the following processes:
  • The metabolism of substrates, vitamins, and minerals.
  • Modulation of all other hormones and their target-tissue responses.
  • Stimulation of O2 consumption and generation of metabolic heat.
  • Regulation of protein synthesis, and carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.
  • Stimulation of demand for co-enzymes and related vitamins.

Subclinical thyroid disease
Subclinical hypothyroidism Suspect if TSH >4mU/L with normal T4 and T3, and no 
symptoms. It is common: ~10% of those >55yrs have TSH. Risk of progression to 
frank hypothyroidism is ~2%, and increases as TSH; risk doubles if thyroid peroxi-
dase antibodies are present, and is also increased in men. Management:
  • Conﬁ rm that raised TSH is persistent (recheck in 2–4 months).
  • Recheck the history: if any non-speciﬁ c features (eg depression), discuss beneﬁ ts 

of treating (p220) with the patient—maybe they will function better.

  • Have a low threshold for carefully supervised treatment as your patient may 
not be so asymptomatic after all, and cardiac deaths may be prevented. Treat 
if: 1 TSH ≥10mu/L. 2 +ve thyroid autoantibodies. 3 Past (treated) Graves’. 4 Other 
organ-speciﬁ c autoimmunity (type 1 DM, myasthenia, pernicious anaemia, viti-
ligo), as they are more likely to progress to clinical hypothyroidism. If TSH 4–10, 
and vague symptoms, treat for 6 months—only continue if symptoms improve 
(or the patient is trying to conceive). If the patient does not fall into any of these 
categories, monitor TSH yearly.

  • Risks  from  well-monitored  treatment  of  subclinical  hypothyroidism  are  small 

(but there is an risk of atrial ﬁ brillation and osteoporosis if over-treated).

Subclinical hyperthyroidism occurs when TSH, with normal T4 and T3. There 
is a 41% increase in relative mortality from all causes versus euthyroid control 
subjects—eg from AF and osteoporosis. Management:
  • Conﬁ rm that suppressed TSH is persistent (recheck in 2–4 months).
  • Check for a non-thyroidal cause: illness, pregnancy, pituitary or hypothalamic 
insuffi  ciency (suspect if T4 or T3 are at the lower end of the reference range), use 
of TSH-suppressing medication, eg thyroxine, steroids.

  • If TSH <0.1, treat on an individual basis, eg with symptoms of hyperthyroidism, AF, 

unexplained weight loss, osteoporosis, goitre.

  • Options are carbimazole or propylthiouracil—or radioiodine therapy.
  • If no symptoms, recheck 6-monthly.

Fig 5.16  Facial appearance in hypothyroidism. Look 
for:  pallor;  coarse,  brittle,  diminished  hair  (scalp, 
axillary, and pubic); dull or blank expres sion lack ing 
sparkle; coarse features; puff y lids. These signs are 
subtle: have a low thres hold for meas uring TSH.

Reproduced from Cox and Roper, Clinical Skills, 2005, 
with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   221

_OHCM_10e.indb   221

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

222

Parathyroid hormone and hyperparathyroidism

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

3Ω.

3Ω  from  bones  •Ca2+  and  PO4

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is normally secreted in response to low ionized Ca2+ levels, 
by four parathyroid glands situated posterior to the thyroid (p601). The glands are 
controlled by Ωve feedback via Ca2+ levels. PTH acts by: •osteoclast activity releasing 
Ca2+  and  PO4
3Ω  reabsorption  in  the  kidney  •active 
1,25 dihydroxy-vitamin D3 production is . Overall eff ect is Ca2+ and PO4
Primary hyperparathyroidism Causes: ~80% solitary adenoma, ~20% hyper plasia of 
all glands, <0.5% parathyroid cancer. Presentation: Often ‘asymp tomatic’ (not in retro-
spect!), with Ca2+ on routine tests. Signs relate to: 1 Ca2+ (p676): weak, tired, depressed, 
thirsty, dehydrated-but-polyuric; also renal stones, abdominal pain, 
panc reatitis, and ulcers (duodenal : gast ric ≈ 7:1). 2 Bone resorption 
eff ects of PTH can cause pain, fractures, and osteopenia/osteopo-
rosis. 3 BP: so check Ca2+ in everyone with hypertension.  Associa-
tion: MEN-1 (BOX ‘Multiple endocrine neoplasia’). Tests: Ca2+ & PTH or 
inappropriately normal (other causes of this: thiazides, lithium, fa-
milial hypo calciuric hypercalcaemia, ter tiary hyper parathyroidism). 
3Ω (unless in renal failure), ALP from bone activity, 24h uri-
Also PO4
nary Ca2+. Imaging: osteitis ﬁ brosa cystica (due to severe resorp-
tion; rare) may show up as subperiosteal erosions, cysts, or brown 
tumours  of  phal anges  ±  acro-osteolysis  (ﬁ g  5.17)  ±  ‘pepper-pot’ 
skull. DEXA (p683; for osteopor osis, p682). : If mild: advise ﬂ uid in-
take to prevent stones; avoid thiazides + high Ca2+ & vit D intake; 
see 6-monthly. Excision of the adenoma or of all four hyperplastic 
glands prevents fractures and peptic ulcers.  Indications: high se-
rum or urinary Ca2+, bone disease, osteo por osis, renal calculi, renal 
function,  age  50yrs.   Complications:  Hypo para thy roidism,  recur-
rent laryngeal nerve damage ( hoarse), sympto matic Ca2+ (hungry 
bones syndr ome; check Ca2+ daily for ≥14d post-op). Pre-op US and 
MIBI scan may localize an adenoma; intra-operative PTH sampling is 
used to conﬁ rm removal.  Recurrence: ~8% over 10yrs.19 Cinacalcet 
(a ‘calcimimetic’) sensitivity of parathyroid cells to Ca2+ ( PTH secret ion); monitor Ca2+ 
within 1 week of dose changes; SE: myalgia; testosterone.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism Ca2+, PTH (appropriately). Causes: vit D intake, 
chronic  renal  failure.   :  Correct  causes.  Phosphate  binders;  vit  D;  cinacalcet  if  PTH 
≥85pmol/L and parathyroidectomy tricky.
Tertiary  hyperparathyroidism  Ca2+,  PTH  (inappropriately).  Occurs  after  pro-
longed secondary hyperparathyroidism, causing glands to act autonomously having 
undergone hyperplastic or adenomatous change. This causes Ca2+ from secretion 
of PTH unlimited by feedback control. Seen in chronic renal failure.
Malignant hyperparathyroidism Parathyroid-related protein (PTHrP) is produced 
by some squamous cell lung cancers, breast and renal cell carcinomas. This mimics 
PTH resulting in Ca2+ (PTH is , as PTHrP is not detected in the assay).

F i g  5 . 1 7   A c r o -
osteo lysis.

©Dr I Maddison 
myweb.lsbu.ac.uk.

Hypoparathyroidism

Primary  hypoparathyroidism  PTH  secretion  is    due  to  gland  failure.  Tests:  Ca2+, 
3Ωor , ALP. Signs: Those of hypocalcaemia, p678 ± autoimmune co morbid ities 
PO4
(BOX ‘Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes’). Causes: Autoimmune; congenital (Di 
George syn., OHCS p642).  : Ca2+ supplements + calcitriol (or synthetic PTH /12h SC: it 
prevents hypercalciuria). 
Secondary hypoparathyroidism Radiation, surgery (thyroidectomy, parathyroid-
ectomy), hypomagnesaemia (magnesium is required for PTH secretion).
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Failure of target cell response to  PTH. Signs: Short 
metacarpals (esp. 4th and 5th, ﬁ g 5.18), round face, short stature, calciﬁ ed basal 
ganglia (ﬁ g 5.19), IQ. Tests: Ca2+, PTH,  or ALP. : As for 1° hypoparathyroidism.
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism The morphological features of pseudo hypo-
parathyroidism, but with normal biochemistry. The cause for both is genetic. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   222

_OHCM_10e.indb   222

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

223

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN types 1, 2a, and 2b)
In MEN syndromes there are functioning hormone-producing tumours in multiple 
organs (they are inherited as autosomal dominants).20 They comprise: •MEN-1 and 2 
•Neuroﬁ bromatosis  (p514)  •Von  Hippel–Lindau  and  Peutz–Jeghers  syndromes 
(p712 & p708)  •Carney complex (spotty skin pigmentation, schwannomas, myxoma 
of skin, mucosa, or heart, especially atrial myxoma), and endo crine tumours: eg 
pituit ary adenoma, adrenal hyperplasia, and testicular tumour. 
MEN-1:
  • Parathyroid hyperplasia/adenoma (~95%; most Ca2+).
  • Pancreas endocrine tumours (70%)—gastrin oma (p716) or insulinoma (p215), or, 
rarely,  somatostatin oma  (DM  +  steatorrhoea  +  gallstones/cholangitis),  VIPoma 
(p258), or gluc agonomas (±glucagon syndrome: migrating rash; glossitis; cheili-
tis, ﬁ g 8.5 p327; an aemia; weight; plasma glucagon; glucose). 

  • Pituitary prolactinoma (~50%) or GH secreting tumour (acromegaly:21 p239); also, 

adrenal and carcinoid tumours are associated.

The MEN-1 gene is a tum our suppressor gene. Menin, its protein, alters trans cription 
activation.  Many are sporadic, presenting in the 3rd–5th decades.
MEN-2a:
  • Thyroid: medullary thyroid carcinoma (seen in ~100%, p600).
  • Adrenal: phaeochromocytoma (~50%, usually benign and bilateral).
  • Parathyroid hyperplasia (~80%, but less than 20% have Ca2+). 
MEN-2b:  Has  similar  features  to  MEN-2a  plus  mucosal  neuromas  and  Marfanoid 
appearance  (p706),  but  no  hyper parathyroidism.  Mucosal  neuromas  consist  of 
‘bumps’ on: lips, cheeks, tongue, glottis, eyelids, and vis ible corneal nerves. 
The gene involved in MEN-2a and b is the ret proto-oncogene, a receptor tyrosine 
kinase. Tests for ret mutations are revol ution izing MEN-2 treatment by enabling a 
prophylactic thyroidectomy to be done before neoplasia occurs, usually before 
3yrs of age.  NB: ret mutations rarely contribute to sporadic parathyroid tumours.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
Autoimmune disorders cluster into two deﬁ ned syndromes:
Type 1 Autosomal recessive, rare.
Cause: Mutations of AIRE (Auto ImmuneREgulator) gene on chromosome 21.
Features:  •Addison’s  disease.  •Chronic  mucocutaneous  candidiasis.  •Hypo-
parathyroidism. Also associated with hypogonadism, pernicious anaemia, autoim-
mune primary hypothyroidism, chronic active hepatitis, vitiligo, alopecia.
Type 2 HLA D3 and D4 linked, common. Cause: Polygenic.
Features: •Addison’s disease. •Type 1 diabetes mellitus (in 20%).
  • Autoimmune thyroid disease—hypothyroidism or Graves’ disease.
Also associated with primary hypogonadism, vitiligo, alopecia, pernicious anae-
mia, chronic atrophic gastritis, coeliac disease, dermatitis herpetiformis.

Fig 5.18  Pseudohypopara-
thyroidism: short 4th and 5th 
metacarpals.

Fig 5.19  Cerebral calciﬁ cation in pseudohypopara thyroid-
ism: periventricular (left) and basal ganglia (right). 

Courtesy of Professor Peter Scally.

_OHCM_10e.indb   223

_OHCM_10e.indb   223

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

224

Adrenal cortex and Cushing’s syndrome

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Physiology The adrenal cortex produces steroids: 1 Glucocorticoids (eg cortisol), 
which  aff ect  carbohydrate,  lipid,  and  protein  metabolism.  2  Mineralocorticoids, 
which control sodium and potassium balance (eg aldosterone, p668). 3 Androgens, 
sex hormones which have weak eff ect until peripheral conversion to testosterone 
and dihydrotestosterone. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) from the hypothala-
mus stimulates ACTH secretion from the pituitary, which in turn stimulates cortisol 
and androgen production by the adrenal cortex. Cortisol is excreted as urinary free 
cortisol and various 17-oxogenic steroids.
Cushing’s syndrome This is the clinical state produced by chronic glucocorticoid 
excess + loss of the normal feedback mechanisms of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
adrenal axis and loss of circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion (normally highest on 
waking). The chief cause is oral steroids. Endogenous causes are rare: 80% are due 
to ACTH;  of these a pituitary adenoma (Cushing’s disease) is the commonest cause.
1      ACTH-dependent causes (ACTH)

  • Cushing’s disease: Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia from an ACTH-secreting pituitary 
adenoma (usually a microadenoma, p234). : >1:1. Peak age: 30–50yrs. A low-
dose dexamethasone test (BOX) leads to no change in plasma cortisol, but 8mg 
may be enough to more than halve morning cortisol (as occurs in normals). 

  • Ectopic  ACTH production: Especially small cell lung cancer and carcinoid tum-
ours,  p271.  Speciﬁ c  features:  pigmentation  (due  to  ACTH),  hypokalaemic 
metabolic alkalosis (cortisol leads to mineralocorticoid activity), weight loss, 
hyper glycaemia. Classical features of Cushing’s are often absent. Dexamethasone 
even in high doses (8mg) fails to suppress cortisol production.

  • Rarely, ectopic CRF production: Some thyroid (medullary) and prostate cancers.

2      ACTH-independent causes (ACTH due to Ωve feedback)
  • Iatrogenic: Pharmacological doses of steroids (common).
  • Adrenal adenoma/cancer: (May cause abdo pain ± virilization in , p230.) Because 
the tumour is autonomous, dexamethasone in any dose won’t suppress cortisol.
  • Adrenal nodular hyperplasia: (As for adrenal adenoma, no dexamethasone sup-

pression.)

  • Rarely: Carney complex, p223. McCune–Albright syndrome, see OHCS p650.

Symptoms  Weight;  mood  change  (depression,  lethargy,  irritability,  psychosis); 
proximal weakness; gonadal dysfunction (irregular menses; hirsut ism; erectile dys-
function); acne; recurrent Achilles tendon rupture; occasionally virilization if .
Signs Central obesity; plethoric, moon face; buff alo hump; supraclavicular fat distri-
bution; skin & muscle atrophy; bruises; purple abdominal striae (ﬁ g 5.20); osteoporo-
sis; BP; glucose; infection-prone; poor healing. Signs of the cause (eg abdo mass).
Tests Random plasma cortisols may mislead, as illness, time of day, and stress (eg 
vene puncture) inﬂ uence results. Also, don’t rely on imaging to localize the cause: non-
functioning ‘incidentalomas’ occur in ~5% on adrenal CT and ~10% on pituitary MRI. 
MRI detects only ~70% of pituitary tumours causing Cushing’s (many are too small).
Treatment Depends on the cause.
• Iatrogenic: Stop medications if possible.
  • Cushing’s disease: Selective removal of pituitary adenoma (trans -sphenoidally). 
Bilateral adrenalectomy if source unlocatable, or recurrence post-op (complica-
tion: Nelson’s syndrome: skin pigmentation due to ACTH from an enlarging pituitary 
tumour, as adrenalectomy removes Ωve feedback; responds to pituitary radiation).

  • Adrenal  adenoma  or  carcinoma:  Adrenalectomy:  ‘cures’  adenomas  but  rarely 

cures cancer. Radiotherapy & adrenolytic drugs (mitotane) follow if carcinoma.
  • Ectopic ACTH: Surgery if tumour is located and hasn’t spread. Metyrapone, ketocon-
azole, and ﬂ uconazole cortisol secretion pre-op or if awaiting eff ects of radia-
tion. Intubat ion + mifepristone (competes with cortisol at receptors) + etomidate 
(blo cks cortisol synthesis) may be needed, eg in severe ACTH-associated psychosis.
Prognosis Untreated Cushing’s has vascular mortality.22 Treated, prognosis is good 
(but myopathy, obesity, menstrual irregularity, BP, osteoporosis, subtle mood chang-
es and DM often remain—so follow up carefully, and manage individually). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   224

_OHCM_10e.indb   224

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

225

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Investigating suspected Cushing’s syndrome
First, conﬁ rm the diagnosis (a raised plasma cortisol), then localize the source on 
the basis of laboratory testing. Use imaging studies to conﬁ rm the likely source.
1st-line tests Overnight dexamethasone suppression test is a good outpatient 
test.  Dexamethasone  1mg  PO  at  midnight;  do  serum  cortisol  at  8AM.  Normally, 
cortisol suppresses to <50nmol/L; no suppression in Cushing’s syndrome. False Ωve 
rate: <2%; false +ves: 2% normal, 13% obese, and 23% of inpatients. NB: false +ves 
(pseudo -Cushing’s) are seen in depression, obesity, alcohol excess, and inducers of 
liver enzymes (rate of dexamethasone metabolism, eg phenytoin, phenobarbital, ri-
fampicin, p689). 24h urinary free cortisol (normal: <280nmol/24h) is an alternative.
2nd-line tests If 1st-line tests abnormal: 48h dexamethasone suppression test: 
Give dexamethasone 0.5mg/6h PO for 2d. Measure cortisol at 0 and 48h (last test 
at 6h after last dose). Again, in Cushing’s syndrome, there is a failure to suppress 
cortisol. 48h high-dose dexamethasone suppression test: (2mg/6h.) May distin-
guish pituitary (suppression) from others causes (no/part suppression). Midnight 
cortisol: Admit (unless salivary cortisol used). Often inaccurate due to measure-
ment issues. Normal circadian rhythm (cortisol lowest at midnight, highest early 
morning) is lost in Cushing’s syndrome. Midnight blood, via a cannula during sleep, 
shows cortisol  in Cushing’s.
Localization tests (Where is the lesion?) If the 1st- and 2nd-line tests are +ve—
Plasma ACTH. If ACTH is undetectable, an adrenal tumour is likely  CT/MRI adrenal 
glands. If no mass, proceed to adrenal vein sampling. If ACTH is detectable, dis-
tinguish a pituitary cause from ectopic ACTH production by high-dose suppression 
test or corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test: 100mcg ovine or human CRH 
IV.  Measure cortisol at 120min. Cortisol rises with pituitary disease but not with 
ectopic ACTH production. 

If  tests  indicate  that  cortisol  responds  to  manipulation,  Cushing’s  disease  is 
likely. Image the pituitary (MRI) and consider bilateral  inferior  petrosal  sinus 
blood sampling.

If tests indicate that cortisol does not respond to manipulation, hunt for the 
source of ectopic ACTH—eg IV contrast CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis  ± MRI of 
neck, thorax, and abdomen, eg for small ACTH secreting carcinoid tumours.

Fig  5.20  Hypercortisolism  weakens  skin; 
even  normal  stretching  (or  the  pressure  of 
obesity, as here) can make its elastin break—
on  healing  we  see  these  depressed  purple 
scars (striae). Cortisone or rapid growth con-
tributes to striae in other contexts: pregnan-
cy, adolescence, weight lifting, sudden-onset 
obesity, or from strong steroid creams. Striae 
mature into silvery crescents looking like the 
underside  of  willow  leaves.  Unsightly  imma-
ture striae may be improved by YAG lasers. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   225

_OHCM_10e.indb   225

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

226

Addison’s disease (adrenal insuffi  ciency)

Primary adrenocortical insuffi  ciency (Addison’s disease) is rare (~0.8/100 000), 
but can be fatal. Destruction of the adrenal cortex leads to glucocorticoid (cortisol) 
and mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) deﬁ ciency (see ﬁ g 5.21). Signs are capricious: 
it is ‘the unforgiving master of non-speciﬁ city and disguise’.23 You may diagnose 
a viral infection or anorexia nervosa in error (K+ is  in the latter but  in Addison’s).
Physiology:

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.21  Pathways involved in adrenal function.

Causes: 80% are due to autoimmunity in the UK. Other causes: TB (commonest cause 
worldwide), adrenal metastases (eg from lung, breast, renal cancer), lymphoma,  op-
portunistic infections in HIV (eg CMV, Mycobacterium avium, p400); adrenal haem-
orrhage  (Waterhouse–Friderichsen  syndrome  p714;  antiphospho lipid  syndrome; 
SLE),  congenital (late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia).
Secondary adrenal insuffi  ciency The commonest cause is iatrogenic, due to long-
term steroid therapy leading to suppression of the pituitary–adrenal axis. This only 
becomes apparent on withdrawal of the steroids. Other causes are rare and include 
hypothalamic–pituitary disease leading to ACTH production. Mineralocorticoid pro-
duction remains intact, and there is no hyperpigmentation as ACTH.
Symptoms Often diagnosed late: lean, tanned, tired, tearful ± weakness, anorexia, 
dizzy, faints, ﬂ u-like myalgias/arthralgias. Mood: depression, psychosis. GI: nausea/
vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea/constipation. Think of Addison’s in all with un-
explained abdominal pain or vomiting.  Pigmented palmar creases & buccal mucosa 
(ACTH; cross-reacts with melanin receptors). Postural hypotension. Vitiligo. Signs 
of critical deterioration (p836): Shock (BP, tachycardia), T°, coma.
Tests Na+ & K+ (due to mineralocorticoid), glucose (due to cortisol). Also: urae-
mia, Ca2+, eosinophilia, anaemia. : Short ACTH stimulation test (Synacthen® test): 
Do  plasma  cortisol  before  and  ½h  after  tetracosactide  (Synacthen®)  250mcg  IM. 
Addis on’s  is  excluded  if  30min  cortisol  >550nmol/L.  Steroid  drugs  may  interfere 
with  assays:  ask  lab.  NB: in  pregnancy  and  contraceptive  pill,  cortisol  levels  may 
be reass  uring but falsely , due to cortisol-binding globulin. Also: •ACTH: In Addi-
son’s, 9AM ACTH is  (>300ng/L: inappropriately high). It is low in secondary causes 
•21-Hydroxylase  adrenal  autoantibodies:  +ve  in  autoimmune  disease  in  >80% 
•Plasma  renin  &  aldosterone:  to  assess  mineralocortocoid  status.  AXR/CXR:  Any 
past TB, eg upper zone ﬁ brosis or adrenal calciﬁ cation? If no autoantibodies, con-
sider further tests (eg adrenal CT) for TB, histoplasma, or metastatic disease. 
Treatment See p836 for Addisonian crisis (shocked). Replace steroids: ~15–25mg 
hydrocortisone daily, in 2 –3 doses, eg 10mg on waking, 5mg lunchtime.  Avoid giving 
late (may cause insomnia). Mineralocorticoids to correct postural hypotension, Na+, 
K+:  ﬂ udrocortisone  PO  from  50–200mcg  daily.  Adjust  both  on  clinical  grounds.  If 
there is a poor response, sus pect an associated auto immune disease (check thyroid, 
do coeliac serology: p266). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   226

_OHCM_10e.indb   226

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

227

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Steroid use Advise wearing a bracelet declaring steroid use. Add 5–10mg hydrocor-
tisone to daily intake before strenuous activity/exercise. Double steroids in febrile 
illness, injury, or stress. Give out syringes and in-date IM hydrocortis one, and show 
how to inject 100mg IM if vomiting prevents oral intake (seek medical help; admit for 
IV ﬂ uids if dehydrated).
Follow-up Yearly (BP, U&E); watch for autoimmune diseases (pernicious anaemia).4
Prognosis (treated) Adrenal crises and infections do cause excess deaths: mean age 
at death for men is ~65yrs (11yrs <estimated life expectancy; women lose ~3yrs). 

  Exogenous steroid use
Replacement steroids are vital in those taking long-term steroids when acutely 
unwell. Adrenal insuffi  ciency may develop with deadly hypovolaemic shock, if ad-
ditional steroid is not given. See p836.
Steroid use: Warn against abruptly stopping steroids. Emphasize that prescribing 
doctors/dentists/surgeons must know of steroid use: give steroid card.

Excerpt from the notes of Miss E.L.R., 92 days before her death from 
undiagnosed Addison’s disease. From the Coroner’s Court…
‘Typical  day—wakes  up  at  11.30,  still  feels  tired,  then  will  have  some  breakfast 
and usually fall asleep on the couch. The most energy req. activity in last 1 month 
is—cooking herself a pasta meal. Then, totally exhausted will sleep more in pm, 
then eat some dinner. Goes to bed at 11pm—latest. Not able to concentrate...Used 
to weigh 45kg. Now weighs 42kg.’24

Placed on a page about Addison’s disease, we might think there are suffi  cient 
clues to raise the suspicion of Addison’s (even though her electrolytes were not 
particularly awry, and her pigmentation was barely perceptible). But change the 
context to our last busy clinic. We are a little distracted. The memory of Addison’s 
is fading. Who among us will hear the alarm bell ring?

4  Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes types 1–4: 1 Monogenic syndrome (AIRE gene on chromosome 
21); signs: candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism + Addison’s. 2 (Schmidt syndrome.) Adrenal insuffi  ciency + auto 
immune thyroid disease ± DM ± pleuritis /pericarditis. 3 Autoimmune thyroid disease + other autoimmune 
conditions but not Addison’s. 4 Autoimmune combinations not included in 1–3.

_OHCM_10e.indb   227

_OHCM_10e.indb   227

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

228

Hyperaldosteronism

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Primary hyperaldosteronism Excess production of aldosterone, independent of 
the renin–angiotensin system, causing sodium and water retention, and renin re-
lease. Consider if: hypertension, hypokalaemia, or alkalosis in someone not on diuret-
ics. Sodium tends to be mildly raised or normal.
Symptoms: Often asymptomatic or signs of hypokalaemia (p674): weakness (even 
quadriparesis), cramps, paraesthesiae, polyuria, polydipsia. BP but not always. 
Causes: ~ ⅔ due to a solitary aldosterone-producing adenoma (linked to mutations 
in K+ channels)5—Conn’s syndrome. ~ ⅓ due to bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. 
Rare causes: adrenal carcinoma; or glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA)— 
the ACTH regulatory element of the 11-hydroxylase gene fuses to the aldosterone 
synthase gene, aldosterone production, & bringing it under the control of ACTH.
Tests: U&E, renin and aldosterone, and adrenal vein sampling. Do not rely on a low 
K+, as >20% are normokalaemic. For  GRA (suspect if there is a family history of 
early hypertension), genetic testing is available. Treatment: •Conn’s: laparoscopic 
adrenalectomy. Spironolactone (25–100mg/24h PO) for 4wks pre-op controls BP and 
K+. •Hyperplasia: treated medically: spironolactone or amiloride. •GRA: dexametha-
sone 1mg/24h PO for 4wks, normalizes biochemistry but not always BP. If BP is still , 
use spironolactone as an alternative. •Adrenal carcinoma: surgery ± post-operative 
adrenolytic therapy with mitotane—prognosis is poor.
Secondary hyperaldosteronism Due to a high renin from renal perfusion, eg in 
renal artery stenosis, accelerated hypertension, diuretics, CCF, or hepatic failure.
Bartter’s  syndrome  This  is  a  major  cause  of  congenital  (autosomal  recessive) 
salt wasting—via a sodium and chloride leak in the loop of Henle via mutations in 
channels and transporters. Presents in childhood with failure to thrive, polyuria, and 
polydipsia. BP is normal. Sodium loss leads to volume depletion, causing renin and 
aldosterone production, leading to hypokalaemia and metabolic alkalosis, urinary 
K+ and ClΩ. Treatment: K+ replacement, NSAIDS (to inhibit prostaglandins), and ACE-i.

Phaeochromocytoma

Rare  catecholamine-producing  tumours.  They  arise  from  sympathetic  paragan-
glia  cells  (=phaeo chrome  bodies),  which  are  collections  of  chromaffi  n  cells.  They 
are  usually  found  within  the  adrenal  medulla.  Extra-adrenal  tumours  (para-
gangliomas)  are  rarer,  and  often  found  by  the  aortic  bifurcation  (the  organs 
of  Zuckerkandl).  Phaeochromocytomas  roughly  follow  the  10%  rule:  10%  are 
malignant,  10%  are  extra-adrenal,  10%  are  bilateral,  and  10%  are  familial.  Re-
cent  data  suggest  higher  preponderance  in  patients  with  genetic  mutations 
aff ecting  several  genes  including  SDH  (succinyl  dehydrogenase).  Thus,  family  his-
tory  is  crucial  and  referral  for  genetic  screening  (particularly  <50  years  old).  A 
dangerous  but  treatable  cause  of  hypertension  (in  <0.1%).  Associations  ~90% 
are  sporadic;  10%  are  part  of  hereditary  cancer  syndromes  (p215),  eg  thyroid, 
MEN-2A  and  2B,  neuroﬁ bromatosis,  von  Hippel–Lindau  syndrome  (SDH  mutations).
Classic triad Episodic headache, sweating, and tachycardia (± , , or BP, see BOX 
‘Features of phaeochromocytoma’). 
Tests •Biochemical: 24h urine for metanephrines/metadrenaline (better than cat-
echolamines  and  vanillylmandelic  acid25),  WCC.  •Localization:  Abdominal  CT/MRI, 
or  meta-iodo benzylguanidine  (chromaffi  n-seeking  isotope)  scan  (can  ﬁ nd  extra-
adrenal tumours, p738). Treatment Surgery: -blockade pre-op: phen oxybenzamine 
(-blocker) is used before -blocker to avoid crisis from unopposed -adrenergic 
stimulation,  -block  too  if  heart  disease  or  tachycardic.  Consult  the  anaesthe-
tist. Post-op: Do 24h urine metanephrine 2wks post-op, monitor BP (risk of BP). 
Emergency  : p837. If malignant, chemotherapy or therapeutic radiolabelled MIBG 
may be used.  Follow-up: Lifelong: malignant recurrence may present late, genetic 
screening.

5  Tumours from the zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata, or zona reticularis associate with syndromes of  
mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, or androgens respectively, usually; remember ‘GFR≈miner GA’.

_OHCM_10e.indb   228

_OHCM_10e.indb   228

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

229

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Hypertension: a common context for hyperaldosteronism tests
Think of Conn’s in these contexts:
  • Hypertension associated with hypokalaemia.
  • Refractory hypertension, eg despite ≥3 antihypertensive drugs.
  • Hypertension occurring before 40yrs of age (especially in women). 
The approach to investigation remains controversial, but the simplest is to look 
for a suppressed renin and aldosterone (may be normal if there is severe hy-
pokalaemia). CT or MRI of the adrenals is done to localize the cause. This should 
be done after hyperaldosteronism is proven, due to the high number of adrenal 
incident alomas. If imaging shows a unilateral adenoma, adrenal vein sampling 
may be done (venous blood is sampled from both adrenals). If one side reveals 
increased aldosterone:cortisol ratio compared with the other (>3-fold diff erence), 
an adenoma is likely, and surgical excision is indicated. If no nodules or bilateral 
nodules are seen, think about adrenal hyperplasia or GRA.
NB: renal artery stenosis is a more common cause of refractory BP and K+ (p315).

Features of phaeochromocytoma (often episodic and often vague)
Try to diagnose before death: suspect if BP hard to control, accelerating, or episodic.
  • Heart: Pulse; palpit ations/VT; dyspnoea; faints; angina; MI/LVF; cardiomyopathy.6
  • CNS: Headache; visual disorder; dizziness; tremor; numbness; ﬁ ts; encephalopa-

thy; Horner’s syndrome (paraganglioma); subarachnoid/CNS haemorrhage.
  • Psychological: Anxiety; panic; hyperactivity; confusion; episodic psychosis.
  • Gut: D&V; abdominal pain over tumour site;  mass; mesenteric vasoconstriction.
  • Others: Sweats/ﬂ ushes; heat intolerance; pallor; T°; backache; haemoptysis.
Symptoms may be precipitated by straining, exercise, stress, abdominal pressure, 
surgery, or by agents such as -blockers, IV contrast agents, or the tricyclics. The 
site of the tumour may determine precipitants, eg if pelvic, precipitants include 
sexual intercourse, parturition, defecation, and micturition. Adrenergic crises may 
last  minutes  to  days.  Suddenly  patients  feel  ‘as  if  about  to  die’—and  then  get 
better, or go on to develop a stroke or cardiogenic shock. On examination, there 
may be no signs, or hypertension ± signs of heart failure/cardiomyopathy (± para-
doxical shock, similar to Takotsubo’s6), episodic thyroid swelling, glycosuria during 
attacks, or terminal haematuria from a bladder phaeochromocytoma.

6  Takotsubo  cardiomyopathy  (=stress-  or  catecholamine-induced  cardiomyopathy/broken  heart  syn-
drome) may cause sudden chest pain mimicking MI, with ST segments, and its signature apical ballooning 
on echo (also ejection fraction) occurring during catecholamine surges.  It is a cause of MI in the presence 
of normal arteries. The stress may be medical (SAH, p478) or psychological. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   229

_OHCM_10e.indb   229

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

230

Hirsutism, virilism, gynaecomastia, and impotence

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Hirsutism is common (10% of women) and usually benign. It implies male pattern 
hair growth in women. Causes are familial, idiopathic, or are due to androgen secre-
tion by the ovary (eg polycystic ovarian syndrome, ovarian cancer, OHCS p281), the 
adrenal  gland (eg late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia,  OHCS p251, Cushing’s 
syndrome,  adrenal  cancer),  or  drugs  (eg  steroids).  Polycystic  ovarian  syndrome 
(PCOS) causes secondary oligo - or amenorrhoea, infertility, obesity, acne, and hirsutism 
(OHCS  p252).  Ultrasound:  bilateral  polycystic  ovaries.  Blood  tests:  testosterone 
(if  ≥6nmol/L,  look  for  an  androgen-producing  adrenal  or  ovarian  tumour),  sex-
hormone binding globulin, LH : FSH ratio (not consistent), TSH, lipids. Address any feel-
ings of lack of conformity to society’s perceived norms of feminine beauty. 
Management: Healthy eating, optimize weight, shaving; laser photoepilation; wax; 
creams, eg eﬂ ornithine, or ele c trolysis (expensive/time-consuming, but eff ective); 
bleach (1 : 10 hydrogen peroxide).
  • Oestrogens: combined contraceptive pill (OHCS p302)—Yasmin® is one choice as its 
progestogen, drospirenone, is an antimineralocorticoid.  Alternatively, co-cyprindiol 
provided there are no contraindications, such as uncontrolled hypertension and 
current breast cancer. Stop co-cyprindiol 3–4 months after hirsutism has complete-
ly resolved because of increased VTE risk. If COCS are contraindicated or have not 
worked (after 6/12), refer the woman to secondary care for specialist treatment:
  • Metformin (helps with insulin resistance) and spironolactone are sometimes tried.
  • Clomifene is used for infertility (a fertility expert should prescribe).
Virilism Onset of amenorrhoea, clitoromegaly, deep voice, temporal hair recession + 
hirsutism. Look for an androgen-secreting adrenal or ovarian tumour.
Gynaecomastia (ie abnormal amount of breast tissue in men; may occur in normal 
puberty.)  Oestro gen/androgen  ratio  (vs  galactorrhoea  in  which  prolactin  is ). 
Causes: Hypogonadism (see BOX ‘Male hypogonadism’), liver cirrhosis (oestrogens), 
hyperthyroidism, tumours (oestrogen-producing, eg testicular, adrenal; HCG-producing, 
eg  testicular,  bronchial);  drugs:  oestrogens,  spirono lactone,  digoxin,  testosterone, 
marijuana; if stopping is impossible, consider testosterone if hypogonadism ± anti-
oestrogen (tamoxifen). 
Impotence (= erectile dysfunction) Erections result from neuronal release of nitric 
oxide (NO) which, via cGMP and Ca2+, hyperpolarizes and thus relaxes vascular and 
trabecular smooth muscle cells, allowing engorgement. Common after 50yrs, and of-
ten multifactorial. A psychological facet is common (esp. if erectile dysfunction occurs 
only in some situations, if onset coincides with stress, and if early morning erections 
still occur: these also persist in early organic disease).
Organic causes: The big three: smoking, alcohol, and diabetes (reduce NO +autonomic 
neuropathy). Also endocrine: hypogonadism, hyperthyroidism, prolactin; neurologi-
cal: cord lesions, MS, autonomic neuropathy; pelvic surgery, eg bladder-neck, prostate; 
radiotherapy;  atheroma;  renal  or  hepatic  failure;  prostatic  hyper plasia;  penile 
anomalies, eg post-priapism, or Peyronie’s (p708); drugs: digoxin, -blockers, diuretics, 
antipsychotics, antidepressants, oestrogens, ﬁ nasteride, narcotics.
Workup: After a full sexual and psychological history do: U&E, LFT, glucose, TFT, LH, FSH, 
lipids, testosterone, prolactin ± Doppler. Is penile arterial pressure enough for inﬂ ow? 
Is penile sensation OK (if not, ?CNS problem)? Is the veno-occlusive mechanism OK?
:  •Treat  causes.  •Counselling.  •Oral  phosphodiesterase  (PDE5)  inhibitors  cGMP. 
Erection isn’t auto matic (depends on erotic stimuli). Sildenaﬁ l 25–100mg ½–1h pre-
sex (food and alcohol upset abs orption). SE: Headache (16%); ﬂ ush ing (10%); dys -
pepsia (7%); stuff y nose (4%); transient blue-green tingeing of vision (inhibition of 
retinal PDE6). CI: See BOX ‘Contraindications and cautions to PD5 Inhibitors’. Tadalaﬁ l 
(long t½,) 10–20mg ½–36h pre-sex. Don’t use >once daily. Vardenaﬁ l (5–20mg). •Vacu-
um aids (ideal for penile rehabilitation after radical prostatectomy), intra cavernosal 
injections, transurethral pellets, and pros theses (inﬂ atable or malleable; partners 
may receive unnatural sensations). •Corpus cavernosum tissue engineering (eg on 
acellular collagen scaff olds) is in its infancy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   230

_OHCM_10e.indb   230

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Contraindications and cautions to PD5 inhibitors
Contraindications
  • Concurrent use of nitrates.
  • BP high or systolic <90mmHg/arrhythmia.
  • Degenerative retinal disorders, eg retinitis pigmentosa.
  • Unstable angina/stroke <6 months ago.
  • Myocardial infarction <90 days ago.
Cautions Angina (especially if during intercourse).
  • Bleeding; peptic ulcer (sildenaﬁ l).
  • Marked hepatic or renal impairment.
  • Peyronie’s disease or cavernosal ﬁ brosis.
  • Risk of priapism (sickle-cell anaemia, myeloma, leukaemia).
  • Concurrent complex antihypertensive regimens.
  • Dyspnoea on minimal eff ort (sexual activity may be unsupportable).
Use in coronary artery disease has been a question, but is probably OK.26
Interactions:  Nitrates  (contraindication);  cytochrome  p450  (CYP3A)  inducers: 
macrolides, protease inhibitors, theophyllines, azole antifungals, rifamp  icin, phe-
nytoin, carbamazepine, pheno barbital, grapefruit juice (bioavailability). Caution if 
-blocker use; avoid vardenaﬁ l with type 1A (eg quinidine; procainamide) and type 3 
anti-arrhythmics (sotalol; amiodarone)—as well as nitrates as above-mentioned.

231

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Male hypogonadism
Hypogonadism is failure of testes to produce testosterone, sperm, or both. Fea-
tures:  small  testes,  libido,  erectile  dysfunction,  loss  of  pubic  hair,  muscle  bulk, 
fat, gynaecomastia, osteoporosis, mood. If prepubertal: virilization; incomplete 
puberty; eunuchoid body; reduced secondary sex characteristics. Causes include:
Primary hypogonadism is due to testicular failure, eg from •local trauma, tor-
sion, chemotherapy/irradiation •post-orchitis, eg mumps, HIV, brucellosis, leprosy 
•renal failure, liver cirrhosis, or alcohol excess (toxic to Leydig cells) •chromosom-
al abnormalities, eg Klinefelter’s syndrome (47XXY)—delayed sexual development, 
small testes, and gynaecomastia. Anorchia is rare.
Secondary hypogonadism Gonadotropins (LH & FSH), eg from •hypo pituitarism 
•prolactinoma  •Kallman’s  syndrome—isolated  gonadotropin-releasing  hormone 
deﬁ ciency, often with anosmia and colour blindness •systemic illness (eg COPD; HIV; 
DM) •Laurence–Moon–Biedl and Prader–Willi syndromes (OHCS p648 & p652) •Age.
: (p232) If total testosterone 8nmol/L, on 2 mornings (or <15 if LH too) and muscle 
bulk, testosterone may help,  eg 1% dermal gel (Testogel®). Heart, bladder, and sex-
ual fun ction may perk up in age-related hypogonadism. Beware medicalizing ageing!
CI Ca2+; nephrosis; polycythaemia; prostate, breast or liver ca. Monitor PSA.

_OHCM_10e.indb   231

_OHCM_10e.indb   231

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

232

Hypopituitarism

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Hypopituitarism entails secretion of anterior pituitary hormones (ﬁ gs 5.3, 5.22). They 
are aff ected in this order: growth hormone (GH), gonadotropins: follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and 
adreno corticotrophic hormone (ACTH), prolactin (PRL). Panhypo pituitarism is deﬁ cien-
cy of all anterior hormones, usually caused by irradiation, surgery, or pituitary tumour.
Causes  are  at  three  levels.  1  Hypothalamus:  Kallman’s  syndrome  (p231),  tumour, 
inﬂ am mation,  infection  (meningitis,  TB),  ischaemia.  2  Pituitary  stalk:  Trauma,  sur-
gery, mass lesion (craniopharyngioma, p234), meningioma, carotid artery aneurysm. 
3  Pituitary:  Tumour,  irradiation,  inﬂ ammation,  autoimmunity,7  inﬁ ltration  (haemo-
chromatosis, amy loid, metastases), ischaemia (pituitary apoplexy, p234;  DIC 8; Shee-
han’s syndrome9).
Features are due to:
1 Hormone lack: •GH: central obesity, atherosclerosis, dry wrinkly skin, strength, 
bala nce,  well-being,  exercise  ability,  cardiac  output,  osteoporosis,  glucose.  
•Gonadotropin (FSH; LH):  oligomenorrhoea or amenorrhoea, fertility, libido, os-
teoporosis, breast atrophy, dyspareunia.  Erectile dysfunction, libido, muscle bulk, 
hypogonadism (hair, all over; small testes; ejaculate volume; spermatogenesis). 
•Thyroid: as for hypothyroidism (p220). •Corticotropin: as for adrenal insuffi  ciency 
(p226). NB: no skin pigmentation as ACTH. •Prolactin: rare: absent lactation.
2 Causes: Eg pituitary tumour (p234), causing mass eff ect, or hormone secretion 
with secretion of other hormones—eg prolactinoma, acromegaly, rarely Cushing’s.
Tests (The triple stimulation test is now rarely done.)
  • Basal tests: LH and FSH ( or ), testosterone or oestradiol (); TSH ( or ), T4 (); 
prolactin (may be , from loss of hypothalamic dopamine that normally inhibits its 
release), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1; —used as a measure of GH axis, p238), 
cortisol (). Also do U&E (Na+from dilution), Hb (normochromic, normocytic).

  • Dynamic  tests:  1  Short  Synacthen®  test:  (p226)  to  assess  the  adrenal  axis.  
2 Insulin tolerance test (ITT): done in specialist centres to assess the adrenal and GH 
axes. CI: epilepsy, heart disease, adrenal failure. Consult lab ﬁ rst. It involves IV insu-
lin to induce hypoglycaemia, causing stress to cortisol and GH secretion. It is done 
in the morning (water only taken from 22:00h the night before). Have 50% glucose 
and hydrocortisone to hand and IV access. Glucose must fall below 2.2mmol/L and 
the patient should bec ome symptomatic when cortisol and GH are taken. Normal: 
GH >20mU/L, and peak cortisol >550nmol/L.
3 Arginine + growth hormone-releasing hormone test.
4 Glucagon stimulation test is alternative when ITT is contraindicated.

  • Investigate cause: MRI scan to look for a hypothalamic or pituitary lesion.
Treatment Refer to an endocrinologist for assessment of pituitary fuction and to 
oversee hormone replacement and treatment of underlying cause.
  • Hydrocortisone for 2° adrenal failure (p226) before other hormones are given.
  • Thyroxine if hypothyroid (p220, but TSH is useless for monitoring).
  • Hypogonadism  (for  symptoms  and  to  prevent  osteoporosis).  :  options  include 
testosterone  enan thate  250mg  IM  every  3  weeks,  daily  topical  gels  or  buccal 
muco  adhesive tablets. Patches (eg Testogel®) are also used. : (premenopausal). 
Oestrogen: transdermal oestradiol patches, or contra ceptive pill (exceeds replace-
ment needs) ± testosterone or dehydroepi androsterone (DHEA, in hypo androgenic 
women;  a  small  amount  may  improve  well-being  and  sexual  function,  and  help 
bone mineral density and lean body mass).

  • Gonadotropin therapy is needed to induce fertility in both men and women.
  • Growth hormone (GH). Somatotrophin mimics human GH. It addresses problems 
of fat mass, bone mass, lean body mass (muscle bulk), exercise capacity, and 
problems with heat intolerance.

7  Autoimmune hypophysitis (=inﬂ amed pituitary) mimics pituitary adenoma. It may be triggered by preg-
nancy or immunotherapy blocking CTLA-4. No pituitary auto-antigen is yet used diagnostically.
8  Snake bite is a common cause in India (eg when associated with acute kidney injury).
9  Sheehan’s syndrome is pituitary necrosis after postpartum haemorrhage.

_OHCM_10e.indb   232

_OHCM_10e.indb   232

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

233

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.22  Neuroendocrinology: emotions  thoughts  actions. As Michelangelo foretold (in his 
Creation of Adam) ‘all gods and demons that have ever existed are within us as possibilities, de-
sires, and ways of escape’. Within the dark red vault of our skull we see human and god-like forms 
reaching out, as thoughts escape into actions—with legs extending into our brainstem (B) and a 
ﬁ st is pushing from our hypothalamus into the pituitary stalk (P). Above the pituitary we have 
thoughts, ideas, impulses, and neurotransmitters. Below we have hormones. Between is the realm 
of neuroendocrinology—the neurosecretory cells which turn emotions into the releasing factors 
for the pituitary hormones (ﬁ g 5.4).

Image courtesy of Gary Bevans; quote from Frank Lynn Meshberger. Michelangelo, Renaissance Man of 
the Brain, Too?

_OHCM_10e.indb   233

_OHCM_10e.indb   233

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

234

Pituitary tumours

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Pituitary tumours (almost always benign adenomas) account for 10% of intracranial 
tumours (see ﬁ gs 5.23, 5.24). They may be divided by size: a microadenoma is a tumour 
<1cm across, and a macroadenoma is >1cm. There are three histological types (table 5.4):
1      Chromophobe 70%. Many are non-secretory,10 some cause hypopituitarism. Half 
produce prolactin (PRL); a few produce ACTH or GH. Local pressure eff ect in 30%.

2      Acidophil 15%. Secrete GH or PRL. Local pressure eff ect in 10%.
3      Basophil 15%. Secrete ACTH. Local pressure eff ect rare.
Symptoms are caused by pressure, hormones (eg galactorrhoea), or hypopituitarism 
(p232). FSH-secreting tumours can cause macro-orchidism in men, but are rare.
Features of local pressure Headache, visual ﬁ eld defects (bilateral temporal hemi-
anopia, due to compression of the optic chiasm), palsy of cranial nerves  III, IV, VI 
(pressure or invasion of the cavernous sinus; ﬁ g 5.25). Also, diabetes insipidus (DI) 
(p240; more likely from hypothalamic disease); disturbance of hypothalamic centres 
of T°, sleep, and appetite; erosion through ﬂ oor of sella leading to CSF rhinorrhoea.
Tests MRI deﬁ nes intra- and supra-sellar extension; accurate assessment of visual 
ﬁ elds; screening tests:  PRL,  IGF-1 (p238),  ACTH, cortisol,  TFTS,  LH/FSH, testosterone in 
, short Synacthen® test. Glucose tolerance test if acromegaly suspected (p238). 
If Cushing’s suspected, see p225. Water deprivation test if DI is suspected (p240).
Treatment Start hormone replacement as needed (p232). Ensure steroids are given 
before levothyroxine, as thyroxine may precipitate an adrenal crisis. For Cushing’s 
disease see p225, prolactinoma p236, acromegaly p238.
  • Surgery: (ﬁ g 5.26) Most pituitary surgery is trans-sphenoidal, but if there is supra-
sellar extension, a trans-frontal approach may be used. For prolactinoma, 1st-line 
treatment is medical with a dopamine agonist, p236. Pre-op: ensure hydrocortisone 
100mg IV/IM. Subsequent cortisol replacement and reass essment varies with local 
protocols: get advice. Post-op: retest pituitary function (p232) to assess replace-
ment needs. Repeating dynamic tests for adrenal function ≥6 weeks post-op.

  • Radiotherapy: (Eg stereotactic.) Good for residual or recurrent adenomas (good 

rates of tumour control and normalization of excess hormone secretion).27

Post-op Recurrence may occur late after surgery, so life-long follow-up is required. 
Fertility should be discussed: this may be reduced post-op due to gonadotropins.
Pituitary apoplexy Rapid pituitary enlargement from a bleed into a tumour may 
cause mass eff ects, cardiovascular collapse due to acute hypopituit arism, and death.  
Suspect if acute onset of headache, meningism, GCS, ophthalmo plegia/visual ﬁ eld 
defect, especially if there is a known tumour (may present like sub arachnoid haem-
orrhage). : Urgent steroids (hydrocortisone 100mg IV) and meticulous ﬂ uid balance 
± cabergoline (dopamine agonist, if prolactinoma) ± surgery; ﬁ nd the cause, eg a 
predisposition to thrombosis, from antiphospholipid syndrome. 
Craniopharyngioma  Not  strictly  a  pituitary  tumour:  it  originates  from  Rath ke’s 
pouch so is situated between the pituitary and 3rd ventricle ﬂ oor. They are rare, but 
are the commonest childhood intracranial tumour. Over 50% present in childhood 
with growth failure; adults may present with amenorrhoea, libido, hypothalamic 
symptoms (eg DI, hyperphagia, sleep disturbance) or tumour mass eff ect. Tests: CT/
MRI (calciﬁ cation in 50%, may also be seen on skull x-ray). Treatment: Surgery ± 
post-op radiation; test pituitary function post-op.
Table 5.4  Frequency of hormones secreted by pituitary adenomas based on immunohistochemistry
Hormone
PRL only (prolactinoma)
GH only (acromegaly)
PRL and GH
*Sensitive methods of TSH measurement have improved recognition of TSH-secreting tumours. These are 
now more frequently found at microadenoma stage, medially loc a ted, and without associated hormone 
hypersecretion. In these tumours, somatostatin analogues (p238) are very helpful. See also Socin et al. Eur 
J Endocrinol. 2003;148:433–42.

Hormone
ACTH (Cushing’s disease)
LH/FSH/TSH
No obvious hormone

%
7%
≥1%*
30%

%
35%
20%
7%

10  If <1cm, usually ‘incidentaloma’; most non-functioning macroadenomas are revealed by mass eff ect and/
or hypopituitarism. Here, recurrence after surgery is common, so follow carefully with MRIS. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   234

_OHCM_10e.indb   234

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

235

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.23  Sagittal T1-weighted MRI of the brain 
(no  gadolinium  contrast)  showing  a  lesion  in 
the pituitary fossa, most likely a haem or rhagic 
pituitary  adenoma.  Diff erential  diagnosis  in-
cludes a Rathke’s cleft cyst.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Fig 5.24  Coronal T1-weighted MRI of the brain 
(no gadolinium contrast) showing a lesion in the 
pituitary fossa (see ﬁ g 5.23).

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Fig 5.25  The pituitary gland’s relationships to cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI.
Reproduced from Turner and Wass, Oxford Handbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 2009, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

Fig 5.26  Endoscopic surgery is now possible for pituitary surgery.

_OHCM_10e.indb   235

_OHCM_10e.indb   235

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

236

Hyperprolactinaemia

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

This is the commonest hormonal disturbance of the pituitary. It presents earlier 
in women (menstrual disturbance) but later in men (eg with erectile dysfunction 
and/or mass eff ects). Prolactin stimulates lactation.11,12 Raised levels lead to hypo-
gonadism, infertility, and osteoporosis, by inhibiting secretion of gonadotropin-re-
leasing hormone (hence LH/FSH and testosterone or oestrogen).
Causes of raised plasma prolactin (PRL; >390mU/L) PRL is secreted from the an-
terior pituitary and release is inhibited by dopamine produced in the hypothal amus. 
Hyperprolactinaemia  may  result  from  1  Excess  production  from  the  pituitary,  eg 
prolactinoma. 2 Disinhibition, by compression of the pituitary stalk, reducing local 
dopamine levels. 3 Use of a dopamine antagonist. A PRL of 1000–5000mU/L may re-
sult from any, but >5000 is likely to be due to a prolactinoma, with macroadenomas 
(>10mm) having the highest levels, eg 10 000–100 000.
  • Physiological: Pregnancy; breastfeeding; stress. Acute rises occur post-orgasm.11
  • Drugs  (most  common  cause):  Metoclop ramide;  haloperidol;  methyldopa;  oes-
trogens; ecstasy/MDMA;12 antipsychotics (a reason for ‘non-compliance’: sustained 
hyperprolactinaemia may cause libido, anorgasmia, and erectile dysfunction). 
  • Diseases: Prolactinoma: micro- or macroadenoma; Stalk damage: pituitary ad-
enomas,  surgery,  trauma;  Hypo thalamic  disease:  craniopharyngioma,  other  tu-
mours; Other: hypothyroidism (due to TRH), chronic renal failure (excretion).

Symptoms : Amenorrhoea or oligomenorrhoea; infertility; galactorrhoea (ﬁ g 5.27). 
Also: libido, weight, dry vagina. : Erectile dysfunction, facial hair, galactorrhoea. 
May present late with osteoporosis or local pressure eff ects from the tumour (p234).
Tests Basal PRL: non-stressful venepuncture between 09.00 and 16.00h. Do a preg-
nancy test, TFT, U&E. MRI pituitary if other causes are ruled out.
Management Refer to a specialist endocrinology clinic. Dopamine agonists (bro-
mocriptine or cabergoline) are 1st line.
Microprolactinomas:  A  tumour  <10mm  on  MRI  (~25%  of  us  have  asymptomatic 
microprolactinomas). Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, PRL secretion, restores 
menstrual cycles and tumour size. Dose is titrated up: 1.25mg PO; increase weekly 
by 1.25–2.5mg/d until ~2.5mg/12h. SE: nausea, depression, postural hypotension (mini-
mize by giving at night). If pregnancy is planned, use barrier contraception until 2 
periods have occurred. If subsequent pregnancy occurs, stop bromocriptine after 
the 1st missed period.  An alternative dopamine agonist is cabergoline: more eff ec-
tive and fewer SE, but there are fewer data on safety in pregnancy. NB: ergot alkaloids 
(bromocriptine and cabergoline) can cause ﬁ brosis (eg echocardiograms are need-
ed). Trans-sphenoidal surgery may be considered if intolerant of dopamine agonists. 
It has a high success rate, but there are risks of permanent hormone deﬁ ciency and 
prolactinoma recurrence, and so it is usually reserved as a 2nd-line treatment.
Macroprolactinomas: A tumour >10mm diameter on MRI. As they are near the optic 
chiasm, there may be acuity, diplopia, ophthalmoplegia, visual-ﬁ eld loss, and op-
tic atrophy.  Treat initially with a dopamine agonist (bromocriptine if fertility is the 
goal). Surgery is rarely needed , but consider if visual symptoms or pressure eff ects 
which fail to respond to medical treatment. Bromocriptine, and in some cases radia-
tion therapy, may be required post-op as complete surgical resection is uncommon. 
If pregnant, monitor closely ideally in a combined endocrine/antenatal clinic as there 
is risk of expansion.
Follow-up Monitor PRL. If headache or visual loss, check ﬁ elds (? do MRI). Medication 
can be decreased after 2yrs, but recurrence of hyperprolactinaemia and expansion 
of the tumour may occur, and so these patients should be monitored carefully.

11  The prolactin increase ( and ) after coitus is ~400% greater than after masturbation; post-orgasmic 
prolactin is part of a feedback loop decreasing arousal by inhibiting central dopaminergic processes. The 
size of post-orgasmic prolactin increase is a neurohormonal index of sexual satisfaction.
12  MDMA also oxytocin; prolactin + oxytocin are thought to mediate post-orgasmic well-being.

_OHCM_10e.indb   236

_OHCM_10e.indb   236

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

237

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Fig 5.27  Galactorrhoea can be proliﬁ c enough to create medium-sized galaxies (bot tom right). 
In the Birth of the Milky Way Hera is depicted by Rubens in her chariot, being drawn through 
the night sky by ominous black peacocks. Between journeys, she enjoyed discussing diffi  cult en-
docrinological topics with her husband Zeus (who was also her brother), such as whether women 
or men ﬁ nd sexual intercourse more enjoyable. Hera inclined to the latter—and it is on this ﬂ imsy 
evidence, and her gorgeous galactorrhoea, that we diagnose her hyperprolactin aemia (which is 
known to decrease desire, lubrication, orgasm, and satisfaction).  In the end, this issue was settled, 
in favour of Zeus’s view, by Tiresias, who had unique insight into this intriguing question: every time 
this soothsayer saw two snakes entwined, (s)he changed sex, so coming to know a thing or two 
about gender and pleasure. This is a primordial example of an ‘N of 1’ trial, where the subject is his 
or her own control. Generalizability can be a problem with this methodology.

© Fine Art Images/ Age Fotostock.

_OHCM_10e.indb   237

_OHCM_10e.indb   237

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

238

Acromegaly

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

This is due to secretion of GH (growth hormone) from a pituitary 
tumour (99%) or hyperplasia, eg via ectopic GH-releasing hormone 
from a carcinoid tumour. :≈1:1. Incidence: UK 3/million/yr.  ~5% 
are associated with MEN-1 (p223). GH stimulates bone and soft tissue 
growth through secretion of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1).
Symptoms  Acroparaesthesia  (akron=extremities);  amenor-
rhoea; libido; headache; sweating; snoring; arthralgia; backache; 
ﬁ g 5.28: ‘My rings don’t ﬁ t, nor my old shoes, and now I’ve got a 
wonky bite (malocclusion) and curly hair. I put on lots of weight, 
all muscle and looked good for a while; now I look so haggard’. 
Signs  (BOX ‘Signs  of  acromegaly’.)  Often  predate  diagnosis  by 
>4yrs. If acromegaly occurs before bony epiphyses fuse (rare), 
gigantism occurs.
Complications (May present with CCF or ketoacidosis.) 
  • Impaired glucose tolerance (~40%), DM (~15%). 
  • Vascular:  BP,  left  ventricular  hypertrophy  (±dilatation/CCF), 
cardiomyopathy, arrhy thmias. There is risk of ischaemic heart 
disease and stroke (?due to BP ± insulin resistance and GH-in-
duced increase in ﬁ brinogen and decrease in protein S). 
  • Neoplasia: colon cancer risk; colonoscopy may be needed.21
Acromegaly in pregnancy (Subfertility is common.) Pregnancy 
may be normal; signs and chemistry may remit.  Monitor glucose.
Tests Glucose, Ca2+, and PO4
3Ω. GH: Don’t rely on random GH as 
secret ion is pulsatile and during peaks acromeg alic and normal 
levels overlap. GH also  in: stress, sleep, puberty, and pregnancy. 
Normally GH secretion is inhibited by high glucose, and GH hardly 
detectable. In acromegaly GH release fails to suppress.
  • If basal serum GH is >0.4mcg/L (1.2mIU/L) and/or if IGF-I (p232), 
an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is needed. If the lowest GH 
value during OGTT is above 1mcg/L (3mIU/L), acro megaly is con-
ﬁ rmed. With general use of very sensitive assays, it has been 
said  that  this  cut-off   be  decreased  to  0.3mcg/L  (0.9mIU/L).28 
Method: Collect samples for  GH glucose at: 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 
150min.  Possible  false  +ves:  puberty,  pregnancy,  hepatic  and 
renal disease, anorexia nervosa, and DM.

  • MRI scan of pituitary fossa. • Look for hypopituitarism (p232).
  • Visual ﬁ elds and acuity. • ECG, echo. Old photos if possible.
Treatment Aim to correct (or prevent) tumour compression by 
excising the lesion, and to reduce GH and IGF-I levels to at least a 
‘safe’ GH level of <2mcg/L (<6mIU/L).  A 3-part strategy: 1 Trans-
sphenoidal surgery is often 1st line. 2 If surgery fails to correct 
GH/IGF-I hypersecretion, try somatostatin analogues (SSA) and/or 
radiotherapy, SSA being generally preferred. Example: octreotide 
(Sandostatin LAR®, given monthly IM), or lanreotide (Somatuline 
LA®).  SE:  pain  at  the  injection  site;  gastrointestinal:  abdominal 
cramps,  ﬂ atulence,  loose  stools,  gallstones;  impaired  glucose 
tolerance. 3 The GH antagonist pegvisomant (recombinant GH ana-
logue) is used if resistant or intolerant to SSA. It supp resses IGF-1 
to normal in 90%, but GH levels may rise; rarely tumour size in-
creases, so monitor closely. Radiotherapy: If unsuited to sur gery 
or as adjuvant; may take years to work. Follow-up: Yearly GH, IGF-
1  ± OGTT; visual ﬁ elds; vascular assess ment. BMI; photos (ﬁ g 5.29).
Prognosis May return to normal (any excess mortality is mostly 
vascular). 16% get diabetes with SSAs vs ~13% after surgery. 

Fig 5.28  Acromegaly. Courtesy of Omar Rio.
My life with acromegaly. (http://odelrio.blogspot.com)

_OHCM_10e.indb   238

_OHCM_10e.indb   238

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

239

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

(a)

(b)

Fig 5.29  (a) and (b) Coarsening of the face and  growth of hands and mandible (prognathism). 

Signs of acromegaly
  • Growth of hands (ﬁ g 5.29b; may be spade-like), jaw (ﬁ g 5.29a) and feet (sole 

may encroach on the dorsum).

  • Coars ening face; wide nose.
  • Big supraorbital ridges.
  • Macroglossia (big tongue).
  • Widely spaced teeth.
  • Puff y lips, eyelids, and skin (oily and large-pored); also skin tags.
  • Scalp folds (cutis verticis gyrata; due to expanding but tethered skin).
  • Skin darkening (ﬁ g 5.29).
  • Acanthosis nigricans (ﬁ g 12.28, p563).
  • Laryngeal dyspnoea (ﬁ xed cords).
  • Obstructive sleep apnoea.
  • Goitre (thyroid vascularity).
  • Proximal weakness + arthropathy.
  • Carpal tunnel signs in 50%, p503.
  • Signs from any pituitary mass: hypopituitarism ± local mass eff ect (p232; vision; 

hemianopia); ﬁ ts. 

Dysmorphia, personal identity, and acromegaly
We might have devoted this box to a grotesque homunculus depicting the signs of 
acromegaly: all disconnected lips, hands, feet, brows, and noses. But our integra-
tive ethics disallow this, and ask us instead to see if acromegaly can reveal some-
thing universal about our patients and ourselves. What is it like to feel in the grip 
of some ‘alien puberty’ or ‘empty pregnancy’? These analogies are physiological as 
well as metaphorical.14,15 The changes of acromegaly are not so insidious that the 
patient thinks all is ﬁ ne: there is often partial knowledge and a few dark thoughts 
on looking into the mirror. Even when we lay our lives end-to-end for inspection 
(ﬁ g 5.28), changes are subtle. It can take the observations of others to force us 
to come face-to-face with the truth of our new unfolding self. In one patient the 
comment was ‘So are you pregnant again?’ ‘Why do you ask?’ ‘Because your nose 
is as big as it was when you were last pregnant’. So here we have the well-known 
‘physiological acromegaly of pregnancy’14 predating the pathological, as the carni-
val of personal identity moves from helter-skelter to roller-coaster.

14  GH variants made by the placenta rise exponentially until 37wks’ gestation; pituitary GH gradually drops 
to near-undetectable levels. ‘Gestational acromegaly’ probably develops to foster fetoplacental growth; its 
side-eff ects include facial oedema, carpal tunnel symptoms, and nose enlargement.
15  Puberty sees GH- and gonad-mediated rises in bone and muscle mass + other ‘acromegalic’ eff ects. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   239

_OHCM_10e.indb   239

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

240

Diabetes insipidus (DI)

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

Physiology This is the passage of large volumes (>3L/day) of dilute urine due to 
impaired water resorption by the kidney, because of reduced ADH secretion from the 
posterior pituitary (cranial DI) or impaired response of the kidney to ADH (nephro-
genic DI).
Symptoms Polyuria; polydipsia; dehydration; symptoms of hypernatraemia (p672). 
Polydipsia can be uncontrollable and all-consuming, with patients drinking anything 
and everything to hand: in such cases, if beer is on tap, disaster will ensue! 
Causes of cranial DI •Idiopathic (50%). •Congenital: defects in ADH gene, DIDMOAD.16 
•Tumour (may present with DI + hypopituitarism): craniopharyn gioma, metastases, 
pituitary tumour. •Trauma: temporary if distal to pituitary stalk as proximal nerve 
endings grow out to ﬁ nd capillaries in scar tissue and begin direct secretion again. 
•Hypophysectomy.  •Autoimmune  hypophysitis  (p232).  •Inﬁ ltration:  histiocytosis, 
sarcoid o sis.17 •Vascular: haemorrhage.18 •Infection: meningoencephalitis.
Causes of nephrogenic  DI •Inherited. •Metabolic: low potassium, high calcium. 
•Drugs: lithium, demeclocycline. •Chronic renal disease. •Post-obstructive uropathy.
Tests U&E, Ca2+, glucose (exclude DM), serum and urine osmolalities. Serum osm ol ality 
estimate ≈ 2 ≈ (Na+ + K+) + urea + glucose (all in mmol/L). Normal plasma osmolality is 
285–295mOsmol/kg, and urine can be concentrated to more than twice this concentra-
tion. Signiﬁ cant DI is excluded if urine to plasma (U:P) osmolality ratio is more than 2:1, 
provided plasma osmolality is no greater than 295mOsmol/kg. In DI, despite raised 
plasma osmolality, urine is dilute with a U:P ratio <2. In primary polydipsia there may be 
dilutional hyponatraemia—and as hyponatraemia may itself cause mania,  be cautious 
of saying ‘It’s water intoxication from psychogenic polydipsia’.
Diagnosis Water deprivation test: See BOX ‘The 8-hour water deprivation test’. NB: 
it is often diffi  cult to diff erentiate primary polydipsia from partial DI. : DM; diuret-
ics or lithium use; primary polydipsia causes symptoms of polydipsia and polyuria 
with dilute urine. Its cause is poorly understood;19 it may be associated with schizo-
phrenia or mania (±Li+ therapy), or, rarely, hypothal amic dis ease (neurosarcoid; tu-
mour; encephalitis; brain injury; HIV encephalopathy).  As part of this syndrome, the 
kidneys may lose their ability to fully concentrate urine, due to a wash-out of the 
normal concentrating gradient in the renal medulla.
Treatment Cranial DI: MRI (head); test anterior pituitary function (p232). Give desm-
opressin, a synthetic analogue of ADH (eg Desmomelt® tablets).
Nephrogenic: Treat the cause. If it persists, try bendro ﬂ umethiazide 5mg PO/24h. 
NSAIDS  lower  urine  volume  and  plasma  Na+  by  inhibiting  prostaglandin  synthase: 
prostaglandins locally inhibit the action of ADH. 
Emergency management
  • Do urgent plasma  U&E, and serum and urine osmolalities. Monitor urine output 

carefully and check U&E twice a day initially.

  • IVI to keep up with urine output. If severe hypernatraemia, do not lower Na+ rapidly 
as this may cause cerebral oedema and brain injury. If Na+ is ≥170, use 0.9% saline 
initially—this contains 150mmol/L of sodium. Aim to reduce Na+ at a rate of less 
than 12mmol/L per day. Use of 0.45% saline can be dangerous.

  • Desmopressin 2mcg IM (lasts 12–24h) may be used as a therapeutic trial.

16  DIDMOAD is a rare autosomal recessive disorder: Diabetes Insipidus, Diabetes Mellitus, Optic Atrophy 
and Deafness (also known as Wolfram’s syndrome).
17  Suspect neurosarcoidosis if CSF protein (seen in 34%), facial nerve palsy (25%), CSF pleocytosis (23%), 
diabetes insipidus (21%), hemiparesis (17%), psychosis (17%), papilloedema (15%), ataxia (13%), seizures 
(12%), optic atrophy (12%), hearing loss (12%), or nystagmus (9%).
18  Sheehan’s syndrome is pituitary infarction from shock, eg postpartum haemorrhage. It is rare.
19  Most of us could drink 20L/d and not be hyponatraemic; some get hyponatraemic drinking 5L/d; they 
may  have  Psychosis,  Intermittent  hyponatraemia,  and  Polydipsia  (PIP  syndrome),  ?from  intravascular 
volume leading to atrial natriuretic peptide, p137, hence natriuresis and hyponatraemia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   240

_OHCM_10e.indb   240

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

241

l

y
g
o
o
n
i
r
c
o
d
n
E

The 8-hour water deprivation test
Tests the ability of kidneys to concentrate urine for diagnosis of DI (dilute urine in 
spite of dehydration), and then to localize the cause (table 5.5). Do not do the test 
before establishing that urine volume is >3L/d (output less than this with normal 
plasma Na+ and osmolality excludes signiﬁ cant disturbance of water balance).
  • Stop test if urine osmolality >600mOsmol/kg in Stage 1 (DI is excluded).
  • Free ﬂ uids until 07.30. Light breakfast at 06.30, no tea, no coff ee, no smoking.
Stage 1 Fluid deprivation (0–8h): for diagnosis of DI. Start at 08.00.
  • Empty bladder, then no drinks and only dry food.
  • Weigh hourly. If >3% weight lost during test, order urgent serum osmolality. If 

>300mOsmol/kg, proceed to Stage 2. If <300, continue test.
  • Collect urine every 2h; measure its volume and osmolality.
  • Venous sample for osmolality every 4h.
  • Stop test after 8h (16.00) if urine osmolality >600mOsmol/kg (ie normal).
Stage 2 Diff erentiate cranial from nephrogenic DI.
  • Proceed if urine still dilute—ie urine osmolality <600mOsmol/kg.
  • Give desmopressin 2mcg IM. Water can be drunk now.
  • Measure urine osmolality hourly for the next 4h.
Table 5.5  Interpreting the water deprivation test

Diagnosis
Normal

Urine osmolality
Urine osmolality >600mOsmol/kg in Stage 1 U:P ratio >2 (normal 
concentrating ability)

Primary polydipsia Urine concentrates, but less than normal, eg >400–600mOsmol/kg
Urine osmolality increases to >600mOsmol/kg after desmopres-
Cranial DI
sin (if equivocal an extended water deprivation test may be tried 
(no drinking from 18:00 the night before))
No increase in urine osmolality after desmopressin

Nephrogenic DI

Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH)
In SIADH, ADH continues to be secreted in spite of low plasma osmolality or large 
plasma volume. Diagnosis requires concentrated urine (Na+ >20mmol/L and osmo-
lality >100mOsmol/kg) in the presence of hyponatraemia and low plasma osmolal-
ity. Causes are numerous. See p673.

_OHCM_10e.indb   241

_OHCM_10e.indb   241

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

6  Gastroenterology

Contents
Healthy, enjoyable eating  244
The mouth  246

Procedures:
Endoscopy and biopsy  248

Some presenting symptoms:
Dysphagia  250
Nausea and vomiting  250
Dyspepsia and peptic ulcer 

disease  252

Gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux 

disease (GORD)  254
Upper gastrointestinal 

bleeding  256
Diarrhoea  258
Constipation  260

Diseases and conditions:
Ulcerative colitis (UC)  262
Crohn’s disease  264
Gastrointestinal 

malabsorption  266

Coeliac disease  266
Irritable bowel syndrome 

(IBS)  266

Nutritional disorders  268
Chronic pancreatitis  270
Carcinoma of the pancreas  270
Carcinoid tumours  271
Jaundice  272
Liver failure  274
Cirrhosis  276
Viral hepatitis  278
Alcoholism  280
Primary biliary cholangitis 

(PBC)  282

Primary sclerosing cholangitis 

(PSC)  282

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)  284
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 

(NAFLD)  285

Wilson’s disease/hepatolenticular 

degeneration  285

Liver tumours  286
Hereditary haemochromatosis 

(HH)  288

 1-antitrypsin (A1AT) 
deﬁ ciency  290

Fig  6.1  Families  are  rarely  what  they  seem: 
Otto,  Aurelia,  and  Sylvia  seem  to  be  having 
a  nice  cup  of  tea,  but  Warren  (the  son  and 
brother) is absent, Otto’s leg is missing, Aurelia 
is  beside  herself  with  anxiety,  and  neither 
is  fully  aware  of  the  turmoil  spiralling  out  of 
control in their unstable daughter, Sylvia. How 
the  gut  weaves  in  and  out  of  our  patients’ 
stories is one of gastroenterology’s perpetually 
fascinating  and  signiﬁ cant  riddles.  So  when-
ever  you  are  presented  with  an  image  in 
gastroenterology, ask what is missing, and try 
to work out the forces which are perpetuating 
or relieving symptoms. This is all very helpful, 
but  it  can  never  be  relied  on  to  tame  or  pre-
dict  what  happens  next.  So  what  did  happen 
next? See BOX to ﬁ nd out.

We thank Dr Simon Campbell, our Specialist Reader for this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   242

_OHCM_10e.indb   242

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Lumen  
We learn about gastroenterological diseases as if they were separate entities, 
independent species collected by naturalists, each kept in its own dark match-
box—collectors’ items collecting dust in a desiccated world on a library shelf. But 
this is not how illness works. Otto had diabetes, but refused to see a doctor until 
it was far advanced, and an amputation was needed. He needed looking after 
by  his  wife  Aurelia.  But  she  had  her  children  Warren  and  Sylvia  to  look  after 
too. And when Otto was no longer the bread-winner, she forced herself to work 
as  a  teacher,  an  accountant,  and  at  any  other  job  she  could  get.  Otto’s  illness 
manifested in Aurelia’s duodenum—as an ulcer. The gut often bears the brunt of 
other people’s worries. Inside every piece of a gut is a lumen1—the world is in the 
gut, and the gut is in the world. But the light does not always shine. So when the 
lumen ﬁ lled with Aurelia’s blood, we can expect the illness to impact on the whole 
family. Her daughter knows where blood comes from (‘straight from the heart … 
pink ﬁ zz’). After Otto died, Sylvia needed long-term psychiatric care, and Aurelia 
moved to be near her daughter. The bleeding duodenal ulcer got worse when Syl-
via needed electroconvulsive therapy. The therapy worked and now, brieﬂ y, Sylvia, 
before her own premature death, is able to look after Aurelia, as she prepares for 
a gastrectomy.

The story of each illness told separately misses something; but even taken 
in  its  social  context,  this  story  is  missing  something  vital—the  poetry,  in 
most  of  our  patients  lived  rather  than  written—tragic,  comic,  human,  and 
usually  obscure—but  in  the  case  of  this  family  not  so  obscure.  Welling  up, 
as unstoppable as the bleeding from her mother’s ulcer came the poetry of 
Sylvia Plath.

243

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

1  Lumen is Latin for light (hence its medical meaning of a tubular cavity open to the world at both ends), 
as well as being the SI unit of light ﬂ ux falling on an object—ie the power to  illuminate. All doctors have this 
power, whether by insightfully interpreting patients’ lives and illnesses to them, or by acts of kindness—
even something so simple as bringing a cup of tea.

_OHCM_10e.indb   243

_OHCM_10e.indb   243

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

244

Healthy, enjoyable eating

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

‘There’s a lot of people in this world who spend so much time watching their 
health that they haven’t the time to enjoy it.’ Josh Billings (1818–85).

Updates  to  guidelines  on  healthy  eating  perhaps  provide  fodder  for  journalists 
who  have  been  served  a  diet  both  rich  and  varied  in  apparently  contradictory 
advice.  Nonetheless,  for  many  of  our  increasingly  overweight  population,  simply 
eating  less  (eg  2500  calories/d  for  men  and  2000  for  women)  and  balancing  in-
take across food groups seems a sensible start. Diet is of course not independent 
of lifestyle, and we should continue to promote a balanced diet in the context of 
the full range of public health messages. Unravelling these confounding threads in 
population-level data will always pose a challenge—while some studies show veg-
etarians may be less likely to die from ischaemic heart disease,  is this eff ect because 
vegetarians in the UK are more likely to be non-smokers? Overly proscriptive applica-
tion of such population-level data in advice given to individuals (as journalists may 
be prone to do) will always be ﬂ awed and risks drowning important fundamental 
concepts in a sea of cynicism.
Current recommendations must take into account three facts
  • Obesity costs health services as much as smoking—1 in 4 UK adults is obese. 
  • Diabetes mellitus is burgeoning: in some places prevalence is >7% (p206).
  • Past advice has not changed eating habits in large sections of the population.
Advice is likely to focus on the following
Body mass index: (BMI; table 6.1.) Aim for 18.5–25. Controlling quantity may be more 
important than quality. In hypertension, eating the ‘right’ things lowers BP only mar-
ginally, but controlling weight causes a more signiﬁ cant reduction.
Base meals on starch: (Bread, rice, potatoes, pasta.) These provide a slower re-
lease  form  of  carbohydrate  compared  to  diets  containing  reﬁ ned  sugar,  and  be-
ware of the high sugar contents of, eg soft drinks.
Eat enough fruit and vegetables: Aiming for 5 portions a day.
Eat foods high in fat, salt, or sugar infrequently.
Eat some meat, ﬁ sh, eggs, and beans: Aim for 2 portions of ﬁ sh a week, includ-
ing oily ﬁ sh (those rich in omega-3 fatty acid, such as mackerel, herring, pilchards, 
salmon). Non-dairy sources of protein include beans and nuts. Aim to reduce intake 
of red or processed meat to <70g/day.
Eat some milk and dairy products: Select those options with lower fat, sugar and 
salt where possible.
Moderate alcohol use (adults <65yrs): 14U/wk for both men and women, spread 
over 3 or more days. There is no ‘safe’ level.
Supplements:  There is scant evidence for most nutritional supplements in those 
able to follow a balanced diet. Women attempting to conceive should take 400mcg/
day  folic  acid  from  (pre-)conception  until  at  least 12wks.  Vitamin  D  supplements 
(10mcg/day)  may  beneﬁ t  breast-feeding  mothers,  those  ≥65yrs  old,  those  whose 
skin is not typically exposed to sun, or those with very dark skin. Lower doses may be 
recommended for infants and young children.
This  diet  is  not  appropriate  for  all:  • <5yrs  old.  • Need  for  low  residue  (eg 
Crohn’s, UC, p264) or special diet (coeliac disease, p266). Emphasis may be differ-
ent  in:  Dyslipidaemia  (p690);  DM  (p206);  obesity;  constipation  (p260);  liver  failure 
(p274); chronic pancreatitis (p270); renal failure (less protein)(p304); BP (see p140). 
Diffi  culties It is an imposition to ask us to change our diet (children often refuse 
point-blank); a more subtle approach is to take a food we enjoy (crisps) and make it 
healthier (eg low-salt crisps made from jacket potatoes and fried in sunﬂ ower oil).

_OHCM_10e.indb   244

_OHCM_10e.indb   244

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

245

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Losing weight—why and how?
The risks of too much sugar  Excess sugar causes caries, diabetes, obesity—
which  itself  contributes  to  osteoarthritis,  cancer,  hypertension, and  increased 
oxi dative stress—so raising cardiovascular mortality and much more.
Losing weight Motivational therapy. Consider referral to a dietician—a needs-
speciﬁ c diet may be best. In conjunction with exercise and diet strategies, tar-
geted weight-loss can also be achieved successfully with psychotherapy. 
Drugs or surgery for obesity? The most desirable treatment for obesity is still 
primary  prevention,  but  pharmacotherapy  does  work.  Orlistat  lowers  fat  ab-
sorption  (hence  SE  of  oily  faecal  incontinence)—see  OHCS  p514.  Surgery:  Carries 
potential for signiﬁ cant weight loss in appropriately selected patients but also 
signiﬁ cant morbidity (see p626).

Calculating body mass index
Table 6.1  BMI=(weight in kg)/(height in m)2

Some implications within the categories
Consider pathology (inc. eating disorder)

State
Underweight
On target
Overweight
Obesity
Extreme/morbid obesity

BMI
<18.5
18.5–25
25–30
30–40
>40
Caveats: BMI does not take into account the distribution of body fat, and is harder 
to interpret for children and adolescents. Waist circumference >94cm in men 
and >80cm in women reﬂ ects omental fat and correlates better with risk than 
does BMI. BMI is still a valid way of comparing populations: average BMI in the USA 
is 28.8; in Japan, 22. A nation can be lean without being poor. As nations continue 
to adopt the lifestyle trends of the USA, this impacts sustainability. 

Weight loss should be considered
>32 is unsuitable for day-case general surgery
>40 is an indication for bariatric surgery

_OHCM_10e.indb   245

_OHCM_10e.indb   245

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

246

The mouth

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

The diagnosis will often come out of your patient’s mouth, so open it! So many GI 
investigations are indirect...now is your chance for direct observation.
Leucoplakia (ﬁ g 6.2) Is an oral mucosal white patch that will not rub off  and is 
not  attributable  to  any  other  known  disease.  It  is  a  premalignant  lesion,  with  a 
transformation  rate,  which  ranges  from  0.6%  to  18%.   Oral  hairy  leucoplakia  is  a 
shaggy white patch on the side of the tongue seen in HIV, caused by EBV. When 
in doubt, refer all intra-oral white lesions (see BOX).
Aphthous  ulcers  (ﬁ g  6.3)  20%  of  us  get  these  shallow,  painful  ulcers  on  the 
tongue  or  oral  mucosa  that  heal  without  scarring.  Causes  of  severe  ulcers: 
Crohn’s and coeliac disease; Behçet’s (p694); trauma; erythema multiforme; lichen 
planus;  pemphigus;  pemphigoid;  infections  (herpes  simplex,  syphilis,  Vincent’s 
angina, p712). : Minor ulcers: avoid oral trauma (eg hard toothbrushes or foods 
such  as  toast)  and  acidic  foods  or  drinks.  Tetracycline  or  antimicrobial  mouth-
washes (eg chlorhexidine) with topical steroids (eg triamcinolone gel) and topical 
analgesia.  Severe  ulcers:  possible  therapies  include  systemic  corticosteroids  (eg 
oral prednisolone 30–60mg/d PO for a week) or thalidomide (absolutely contraindi-
cated in pregnancy). Biopsy any ulcer not healing after 3 weeks to exclude mal-
ignancy; refer to an oral surgeon if uncertain.
Candidiasis (thrush) (ﬁ g 6.4) Causes white patches or erythema of the buccal mu-
cosa. Patches may be hard to remove and bleed if scraped. Risk factors: Extremes 
of age; DM; antibiotics; immunosuppression (long-term corticosteroids, including in-
halers; cytotoxics; malignancy; HIV). : Nystatin suspension 400 000U (4mL swill and 
swallow/6h). Fluconazole for oropharyngeal thrush.
Cheilitis (angular stomatitis) Fissuring of the mouth’s corners is caused by denture 
problems, candidiasis, or deﬁ ciency of iron or riboﬂ avin (vitamin B2). (ﬁ g 8.5, p327.)
Gingivitis Gum inﬂ ammation ± hypertrophy occurs with poor oral hygiene, drugs 
(phenytoin, ciclosporin, nifedipine), pregnancy, vitamin C deﬁ ciency (scurvy, p268), 
acute myeloid leukaemia (p356), or Vincent’s angina (p712).
Microstomia (ﬁ g 6.5) The mouth is too small, eg from thickening and tightening 
of  the  perioral  skin  after  burns  or  in  epidermolysis  bullosa  (destructive  skin  and 
mucous membrane blisters ± ankyloglossia) or systemic sclerosis (p552).
Oral pigmentation Perioral brown spots characterize Peutz–Jeghers’ (p708). Pig-
mentation anywhere in the mouth suggests Addison’s disease (p226) or drugs (eg 
anti malarials). Consider malignant melanoma. Telangiectasia: Systemic sclerosis; 
Osler–Weber–Rendu  syndrome  (p708).  Fordyce  glands:  (Creamy  yellow  spots  at 
the  border  of  the  oral  mucosa  and  the  lip  vermilion.)  Sebaceous  cysts,  common 
and benign. Aspergillus niger colonization may cause a black tongue.
Teeth (ﬁ g 6.6) A blue line at the gum–tooth margin suggests lead poisoning. Pre-
natal or childhood tetracycline exposure causes a yellow–brown discolouration.
Tongue This may be furred or dry (xerostomia) in dehydration, drug therapy,3 after 
radiotherapy, in Crohn’s disease, Sjögren’s (p710), and Mikulicz’s syndrome (p706).
Glossitis: Means a smooth, red, sore tongue, eg caused by iron, folate, or  B12 deﬁ -
ciency (ﬁ g 8.27, p335). If local loss of papillae leads to ulcer-like lesions that change 
in colour and size, use the term geographic tongue (harmless migratory glossitis).
Macroglossia:  The  tongue  is  too  big.  Causes:  myxoedema;  acromegaly;  amyloid 
(p370).  A  ranula  is  a  bluish  salivary  retention  cyst  to  one  side  of  the  frenulum, 
named after the bulging vocal pouch of frogs’ throats (genus Rana).
Tongue cancer: Appears as a raised ulcer with ﬁ rm edges. Risk factors: smoking, 
alcohol.4 Spread: anterior ⅓ of tongue drains to submental nodes; middle ⅓ to sub-
mandibular nodes; posterior ⅓ to deep cervical nodes (see BOX, p599). Treatment: 
Radiotherapy or surgery. 5yr survival (early disease): 80%. When in doubt, refer.

3  Drugs  causing  xerostomia:  ACE-i;  antidepressants;  antihistamines;  antipsychotics;  antimuscarinics/
anti cholinergics; bromocriptine; diuretics; lo peramide; nifedipine; opiates; prazosin; prochlorperazine, etc.
4  Betel nut (Areca catechu) chewing, common in South Asia, may be an independent risk factor.

_OHCM_10e.indb   246

_OHCM_10e.indb   246

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

White intra-oral lesions
  • Idiopathic keratosis
  • Leucoplakia
  • Lichen planus
  • Poor dental hygiene
  • Candidiasis
  • Squamous papilloma

  • Carcinoma
  • Hairy oral leucoplakia
  • Lupus erythematosus
  • Smoking
  • Aphthous stomatitis
  • Secondary syphilis.

247

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig  6.2  Leucoplakia  on  the  underside  of  the 
tongue. It is important to refer leucoplakia be-
cause it is premalignant.

Fig 6.3  An aphthous ulcer inside the cheek. The 
name  is  tautological:  aphtha  in  Greek  means 
ulceration.

Fig 6.4  White  fur  on  an  erythematous  ton gue 
caused by oral candidiasis. Oropharyngeal can-
didiasis  in  an  apparently  ﬁ t  patient  may  sug-
gest underlying HIV infection.

Fig  6.5  Microstomia  (small,  narrow  mouth), 
eg  from  hardening  of  the  skin  in  sclero derma 
which narrows the mouth. It is cosmet ically and 
functionally disabling. 1

Fig  6.6  White  bands  on  the  teeth  can  be 
caused by excessive ﬂ uoride intake.

_OHCM_10e.indb   247

_OHCM_10e.indb   247

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

248

Endoscopy and biopsy 

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Consent is needed for all these procedures; see p568.
Upper GI endoscopy Indications: See table 6.2. Pre-procedure: Stop PPIS 2wks pre-
op if possible ( pathology-masking). Nil by mouth for 6h before. Don’t drive for 24h 
if sedation is used. Procedure: Sedation optional, eg midazolam 1–5mg slowly IV (to 
remain conscious; if deeper sedation is needed, propofol via an anaesthetist (narrow 
therapeutic range)); nasal prong O2 (eg 2L/min; monitor respirations & oximetry). The 
pharynx may be sprayed with local anaesthetic before the endoscope is passed. Con-
tinuous suction must be available to prevent aspiration. Complications: Sore throat; 
amnesia from sedation; perforation (<0.1%); bleeding (if on aspirin, clopidogrel,  war-
farin, or DOACS these need stopping only if therapeutic procedure). Duodenal biopsy: 
The gold standard test for coeliac disease (p266); also useful in unusual causes of 
malabsorption, eg giardiasis, lymphoma, Whipple’s disease.
Sigmoidoscopy  Views  the  rectum  +  distal  colon  (to  ~splenic  ﬂ exure).  Flexible 
sigmoidoscopy  has  largely  displaced  rigid  sigmoidoscopy  for  diagnosis  of  distal 
colonic pathology, but ~25% of cancers are still out of reach. It can be used thera-
peutically, eg for decompression of sigmoid volvulus (p611). Preparation: Phosphate 
enema PR. Procedure: Learn from an expert; do PR exam ﬁ rst. Do biopsies—macro-
scopic appearances may be normal, eg IBD, amyloidosis, microscopic colitis.
Colonoscopy  Indications:  See  table  6.3.  Preparation:  Stop  iron  1wk  prior;  dis-
cuss with local endoscopy unit bowel preparation and diet required. Procedure: Do 
PR ﬁ rst. Sedation (see earlier in topic) and analgesia are given before colonoscope is 
passed and guided around the colon. Complications: Abdominal discomfort; incom-
plete examination; haemorrhage after biopsy or polypectomy; perforation (<0.1%). 
See ﬁ gs 6.7–6.11. Post-procedure: no alcohol, and no operating machinery for 24h.
Video  capsule  endoscopy  (VCE)  To  evaluate  obscure  GI  bleeding  (p326)  and  to 
detect small bowel pathology. Use small bowel imaging (eg contrast) or patency 
capsule test ahead of VCE if patient has abdominal pain or symptoms suggesting 
small  bowel  obstruction.  Preparation:  Clear  ﬂ uids  only  the  evening  before  then 
nil by mouth from morning until 4h after capsule swallowed. Procedure: Capsule is 
swallowed (ﬁ g 6.12)—this transmits video wirelessly to cap-
ture device worn by patient. Normal activity can take place 
for the day. Complications: Capsule retention in 1% (endo-
scopic or surgical removal is needed)—avoid MRI for 2 wks 
after unless AXR conﬁ rms capsule has cleared; obstruction, 
incomplete exam (eg slow transit, achalasia). Problems: No 
therapeutic options; poor localization of lesions; may miss 
more subtle lesions.
Liver biopsy Route: Percutaneous if INR in range else trans jugular with FFP. Indica-
tions: LFT of unknown aetiology; assessment of ﬁ brosis in chronic liver disease (this 
indication being replaced by ultrasound-based elastography); suspected cirrhosis or 
suspected  hepatic  lesions/cancer.  Pre-op:  Nil  by  mouth  for  8h.  Are  INR  <1.5  and 
platelets >50 ≈ 109/L? Give analgesia. Procedure: Sedation may be given. Do under 
US/CT guidance; the liver borders are percussed and where there is dullness in the 
mid-axillary line in expiration, lidocaine 2% is inﬁ ltrated down to the liver capsule. 
Breathing is rehearsed and a needle biopsy is taken with the breath held in expira-
tion. Afterwards lie on the right side for 2h, then in bed for 4h; check pulse and 
BP every 15 mins for 1h, every 30 mins for 2h, then hourly until discharge 4h post-
biopsy. Complications: Local pain; pneumothorax; bleeding (<0.5%); death (<0.1%). 

Fig 6.12  PillCam®.

_OHCM_10e.indb   248

_OHCM_10e.indb   248

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 6.2  Indications for upper GI endoscopy
Diagnostic indications
Haematemesis/melaena
Dysphagia
Dyspepsia (55yrs old + alarm symptoms or 
treatment refractory, p252)
Duodenal biopsy (?coeliac)
Persistent vomiting
Iron deﬁ ciency (cancer)

Table 6.3  Indications for colonoscopy
Diagnostic indications
Rectal bleeding—when settled, if acute
Iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia (bleeding cancer)
Persistent diarrhoea
Positive faecal occult blood test
Assessment or suspicion of IBD
Colon cancer surveillance

Therapeutic indications
Treatment of bleeding lesions
Variceal banding and sclerotherapy
Argon plasma coagulation for suspected 
vascular abnormality
Stent insertion, laser therapy
Stricture dilatation, polyp resection

Therapeutic indications
Haemostasis (eg by clipping vessel) 
Bleeding angiodysplasia lesion (argon 
beamer photocoagulation)

Colonic stent deployment (cancer)
Volvulus decompression (ﬂ exi sig)
Pseudo-obstruction 

Polypectomy

249

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig  6.7  A  big  polyp  seen  on  colonoscopy.  An 
advantage of colonoscopy over barium enema 
is the ability to biopsy or intervene at the same 
time—in this case, polypectomy.

Fig  6.8  Colonoscopic  image  of  an  adenocar-
cinoma—p616.  Compared  with  a  colonic  polyp 
(ﬁ g 6.7), the carcinoma is irregular in shape and 
colour, larger and more aggressive.

Image courtesy of Dr Anthony Mee.

Image courtesy of Dr J Simmons.

Fig 6.9  Angio dysplasia lesion seen at colonosco-
py. Bleeding may be brisk. : endoscopic oblitera-
tion. It is associated with aortic stenosis (Heyde’s 
syndrome).2

Image courtesy of Dr Anthony Mee.

Fig 6.10  Colonic mucosa in active  UC (p262); it 
is  red,  inﬂ amed,  and  friable  (bleeds  on  touch-
ing).  Signs  of  severity:  muco purulent  exudate, 
mucosal  ulceration  ± spontaneous  bleeding.  If 
quiescent, there may only be a distorted or ab-
sent mucosal vascular pattern.

Image courtesy of Dr J Simmons.

Fig 6.11  Colonoscopic image showing divertic-
ulosis (p628). Navigating safely through the co-
lon, avoiding the false lumina of the diverticula, 
can be a challenge. Don’t go there if diverticula 
are inﬂ amed (diverticulitis): perforation is a big 
risk.  Other  CI  to  colonoscoy:  MI in  last  month; 
ischaemic colitis (Oxford Handbook of Gastro-
enterology  and  Hepatology,  Second  Edition 
(Bloom et al.), p165).

Image courtesy of Dr J Simmons.

_OHCM_10e.indb   249

_OHCM_10e.indb   249

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

250

Dysphagia

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Dysphagia  is  diffi  culty  in  swallowing  and  should  prompt  urgent  investigation  to 
exclude malignancy (unless of short duration, and associated with a sore throat).
Causes Oral, pharyngeal, or oesophageal? Mechanical or motility related? (See BOX 
‘Causes of dysphagia’.)
Five key questions to ask

1      Was there diffi  culty swallowing solids and liquids from the start?
Yes: motility disorder (eg achalasia, CNS, or pharyngeal causes).
No: Solids then liquids: suspect a stricture (benign or malignant).

2      Is it diffi  cult to initiate a swallowing movement?

Yes: Suspect bulbar palsy, especially if patient coughs on swallowing.

3      Is swallowing painful (odynophagia)?

Yes: Suspect ulceration (malignancy, oesophagitis, viral infection or Candida in 
immunocompromised, or poor steroid inhaler technique) or spasm.
4      Is the dysphagia intermittent or is it constant and getting worse?

Intermittent: suspect oesophageal spasm.
Constant and worsening: suspect malignant stricture.

5      Does the neck bulge or gurgle on drinking?

Yes: Suspect a pharyngeal pouch (see OHCS p570).

Signs Is the patient cachectic or anaemic? Examine the mouth; feel for supraclavic-
ular nodes (left supraclavicular node = Virchow’s node—suggests intra-abdominal ma-
lignancy); look for signs of systemic disease, eg systemic sclerosis (p552), CNS disease.
Tests FBC (anaemia); U&E (dehydration). Upper GI endoscopy ± biopsy (ﬁ g 6.13). If suspi-
cion of pharyngeal pouch consider contrast swallow (± ENT opinion). Video ﬂ uoroscopy 
may help identify neurogenic causes. Oesophageal manometry for dysmotility.
Speciﬁ c conditions Oesophagitis: See p254. Diffuse oesophageal spasm: Causes in-
termittent dysphagia ± chest pain. Contrast swallow/manometry: abnormal contrac-
tions.5 Achalasia: Coordinated peristalsis is lost and the lower oesophageal sphincter 
fails to relax (due to degeneration of the myenteric plexus), causing dysphagia, re-
gurgitation, and weight. Characteristic ﬁ ndings on manometry or contrast swallow 
showing dilated tapering oesophagus. Treatment: endoscopic balloon dilatation, or 
Heller’s cardiomyotomy—then proton pump inhibitors (PPIS, p254). Botulinum toxin in-
jection if a non-invasive procedure is needed (repeat every few months). Calcium chan-
nel blockers and nitrates may also relax the sphincter. Benign oesophageal stricture: 
Caused by gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux (GORD, p254), corrosives, surgery, or radiotherapy. 
Treatment: endoscopic balloon dilatation. Oesophageal cancer: (p618.) Associations: 
, GORD, tobacco, alcohol, Barrett’s oesophagus (p695), tylosis (palmar hyperkeratosis), 
Plummer–Vinson syndrome (post-cricoid dysphagia, upper oesophageal web + iron-
deﬁ ciency). CNS causes: Ask for help from a speech and language therapist.
Nausea and vomiting

Consider pregnancy where appropriate! Other causes, p56.
What’s in the vomit? Reports of ‘coff ee grounds’ may indicate upper GI bleeding 
but represent one of the most over-called signs in clinical medicine — always verify 
yourself and look for other evidence of GI bleeding; recognizable food ≈ gastric stasis; 
feculent ≈ small bowel obstruction.
Timing Morning ≈ pregnancy or ICP; 1h post food ≈ gastric stasis/gastroparesis (DM); 
vomiting that relieves pain ≈ peptic ulcer; preceded by loud gurgling ≈ GI obstruction.
Tests  Bloods:  FBC,  U&E,  LFT,  Ca2+,  glucose,  amylase.  ABG:  A  metabolic  (hypochlor-
Ω) indicates severe 
aemic) alkalosis from loss of gastric contents (pH >7.45, HCO3 
vomiting. Plain  AXR: If suspected bowel obstruction (p728). Upper  GI endoscopy: 
(See p248.) If suspicion of bleed or persistent vomiting. Consider head CT in case ICP.
Treatment Identify and treat  underlying  causes. Symptomatic relief: table 6.4. Be 
pre-emptive, eg pre-op for post-op symptoms. Try oral route ﬁ rst. 30% need a 2nd-line 
anti-emetic, so be prepared to prescribe more than one. Give IV ﬂ uids with K+ replace-
ment if severely dehydrated or nil-by-mouth, and monitor electrolytes and ﬂ uid balance.

_OHCM_10e.indb   250

_OHCM_10e.indb   250

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Causes of dysphagia
Mechanical block
Malignant stricture (ﬁ g 6.13)

Pharyngeal cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Gastric cancer
Benign strictures

Oesophageal web or ring (p250)
Peptic stricture
Extrinsic pressure
Lung cancer
Mediastinal lymph nodes
Retrosternal goitre
Aortic aneurysm
Left atrial enlargement

Pharyngeal pouch

Motility disorders
Achalasia (see p250)
Diff use oesophageal spasm
Systemic sclerosis (p552)
Neurological  bulbar palsy (p507)

 Pseudobulbar palsy (p507)
 Wilson’s or Parkinson’s disease
 Syringobulbia (p516)
 Bulbar poliomyelitis (p436)
 Chagas’ disease (p423)
 Myasthenia gravis (p512)

Others
Oesophagitis (p254; reﬂ ux or Candida/HSV)
Globus (=’I’ve got a lump in my throat’: try to dis-
tinguish from true dysphagia)

251

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig 6.13  A malignant lower oesophageal stricture seen at 
endoscopy. Note the asymmetry and heaped edges. Benign 
strictures have a smoother appearance and tend to be cir-
cumferential.

Reproduced from Bloom et al., Oxford Handbook of Gastroen-
terology and Hepatology, 2012, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Remembering your anti-emetics
One way of recalling anti-emetics involves using (simpliﬁ ed) pharmacology.
Table 6.4  Pharmacology of common anti-emetics

Receptor Antagonist

H1

D2

Cyclizine
Cinnarizine
Metoclopramide
Domperidone

Notes

Dose
50mg/8h PO/IV/IM GI causes
30mg/8h PO
10mg/8h PO/IV/IM
60mg/12h PR
20mg/6h PO

Vestibular disorders
GI causes; also prokinetic
Also prokinetic

Vestibular/GI causes

Haloperidol
Ondansetron

Prochlorperazine 12.5mg IM;
5mg/8h PO
1.5mg/12h PO
Chemical causes, eg opioids
4–8mg/8h IV slowly Doses can be higher for, eg 
emetogenic chemotherapy
200–600mcg SC/IM Antimuscarinic  also anti-

Hyoscine hydro-
bromide

5HT3

Others

Dexamethasone

6–10mg/d PO/SC

Midazolam

2–4mg/d SC
(syringe driver)

spasmod ic and antisecretory 
(don’t prescribe with a prokinetic)
Unknown mode of action; an 
adjuvant
Unknown action; anti-emetic ef-
fect outlasts sedative eff ect 3

A ll antidopaminergics can cause dystonias and oculogyric crisis, especially in younger patients.

5  Non-propulsive  contractions  manifest  as  tertiary  contractions  or  ‘corkscrew  oesophagus’  (ﬁ g  16.34,  p743) 
and  sug gest  a  motility  disorder  and  may  lead  to  acid  clearance.  Symptoms  and  radiology  may  not  match. 
Nutcracker oesophagus denotes distal peristaltic contractions >180mmHg. It may cause pain,  relieved by nitrates 
or sublingual nifedipine. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   251

_OHCM_10e.indb   251

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
 
 
 
252

Dyspepsia and peptic ulcer disease

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

War The stomach is a battle ground between the forces of attack (acid, pepsin, Helico-
bacter pylori, bile salts) and defence (mucin secretion, cellular mucus, bicarbonate 
secretion, mucosal blood ﬂ ow, cell turnover). Gastric antisecretory agents, eg H2 re-
ceptor antagonists (H2RAS), and proton pump inhibitors (PPIS) may only work if you 
have optimized cytoprotection (antacids and sucralfate work this way). Success may 
depend on you being not just a brilliant general, but also a tactician, politician, and 
diplomat. Plan your strategy carefully4 (ﬁ g 6.14). As in any war, neglecting psycho-
logical factors can prove disastrous. The aim is not outright victory but maintaining 
the balance of power so all may prosper.
Symptoms Epigastric pain often related to hunger, speciﬁ c foods, or time of day, 
fullness  after  meals,  heart burn  (retro sternal  pain);  tender  epi gastrium.  Beware 
Alarm symptoms: Anaemia (iron deﬁ ciency); loss of weight; anorexia; recent on-
set/progressive symptoms; melaena/haematemesis; swallowing diffi  culty.
H.  pylori  (See  table 6.5.)  If  55yrs  old:  ‘Test  and  treat’  for  H. pylori;6  if  +ve  give 
appropriate  PPI  and  2  antibiotic  combination,  eg  lansoprazole  30mg/12h  PO, 
clarithromycin  250mg/12h  PO, and  amoxicillin  1g/12h  PO  for  1wk.  If  Ωve  give  acid 
suppression alone. Refer for urgent endoscopy (p248) all with dysphagia, as well 
as those 55 with alarm symptoms or with treatment-refractory dyspepsia.
Duodenal ulcer (DU, ﬁ g 6.15.) 4-fold commoner than GU. Major risk factors: H. py-
lori  (90%);  drugs  (NSAIDS;  steroids;  SSRI).  Minor:  Gastric  acid  secretion;  gastric 
emptying (duodenal pH); blood group O; smoking.
Symptoms: Asympto matic or epigastric pain (relieved by antacids) ± weight. Signs: 
Epigastric tenderness. Diagnosis: Upper GI endoscopy. Test for H. pylori. Measure 
gastrin  con cen trations  when  off   PPIS  if  Zollinger–Ellison  syndrome  (p716)  is  sus-
pected. : Non-ulcer dyspepsia; duodenal Crohn’s; TB; lymphoma; pancreatic cancer 
(p270). Follow-up: None; if good response to  (eg PPI).
Gastric  ulcers  (GU.)  Occur  mainly  in  the  elderly,  on  the  lesser  curve.  Ulcers  else-
where are more often malignant. Risk factors: H. pylori (~80%); smoking; NSAIDS; re-
ﬂ ux of duodenal contents; delayed gastric emptying; stress, eg neurosurgery or burns 
(Cushing’s or Curling’s ulcers). Symptoms: Asympto matic or epigastric pain (relieved 
by antacids)  ± weight. Tests: Upper  GI  endoscopy to exclude malignancy (ﬁ g 6.14); 
multiple biopsies from ulcer rim and base (histology, H. pylori). Repeat endoscopy af-
ter 6–8 weeks to conﬁ rm healing and exclude malignancy.
Gastritis  Risk  factors:  Alcohol,  NSAIDS,  H.  pylori,  reﬂ ux/hiatus  hernia,  atrophic 
gastritis,  granulo mas (Crohn’s; sarcoidosis), CMV, Zollinger–Ellison  syndrome  & Mé-
nétrier’s disease (p716 & 706). Symptoms: Epigastric pain, vomiting; Tests: Upper GI 
endoscopy only if suspicious features (ﬁ g 6.14).
Treatment Lifestyle: Alcohol and tobacco.
H. pylori eradication: Triple therapy is 80–85% eff ective at eradication.7
Drugs to reduce acid: PPIS are eff ective, eg lansoprazole 30mg/24h PO for 4 (DU) or 8 
(GU) wks. H2 blockers have a place (ranitidine 300mg each night PO for 8wks).
Drug-induced ulcers: Stop drug if possible. PPIS may be best for treating and pre-
venting GI ulcers and bleeding in patients on NSAID or antiplatelet drugs. Misopros-
tol is an alternative with diff erent SE.  If symptoms persist, re-endoscope, retest for 
H. pylori, and reconsider diff erential diagnoses (eg gallstones). Surgery: See p622.
Complications Bleeding (p256), perforation (p606), malignancy, gastric outﬂ ow.
Functional (non-ulcer) dyspepsia Common. H. pylori eradication (only after a +ve 
result)  may  help.  Some  evidence  favours  PPIS  and  psychotherapy.  Low-dose  ami-
triptyline (10–20mg each night PO) may help. Ant acids, antispasmodics, H2 blockers, 
misoprostol, prokinetic agents, bismuth, or sucralfate all have less evidence. 

6  H. pylori is the commonest bacterial pathogen found worldwide (>50% of the world population over 
40yrs has it). It’s a class I carcinogen causing gastritis (p252), duodenal/gastric ulcers & gastric cancer/
lymphoma (MALT, p362), also associated with coronary artery disease, B12 and iron deﬁ ciency.
7  1 week of therapy suffi  cient; 2 weeks increases erradication rates by ~5% but also increases SE. For resist-
ant infections switch to a 2nd-line antibiotic combination (see BNF).

_OHCM_10e.indb   252

_OHCM_10e.indb   252

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 6.5  Tests (other than serology) should be performed after >2 wks off  ppi

Sensitivity

Speciﬁ city

Invasive tests

Non-invasive

CLO test
Histology
Culture
13C breath test*
Stool antigen
Serology

95%
95%
90%
95%
95%
92%

* The 13C breath test is the most accurate non-invasive Helicobacter test.

95%
95%
100%
95%
94%
83%

Diff  erential diagnosis of dyspepsia

 • Non-ulcer dyspepsia
 • Oesophagitis/GORD

 • Duodenal/gastric ulcer
 • Gastric malignancy

 • Duodenitis
 • Gastritis (p257)

Dysphagia or >55yrs* and persistent 
symptoms or ALARM Signs (see p252)

Yes

Upper GI endoscopy

No further action

Improvement

No

  • Stop drugs causing dyspepsia, eg NSAIDS
  • Lifestyle changes (p254)
  • Over-the-counter antacids, eg magnes-

ium trisilicate 10mL/8h PO
  • Review after 4wks

No improvement

253

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

PPIS or H2 blockers for 4wks
(eg omeprazole 20mg/24h PO or 
ranitidine 150mg/12h PO).

Ωve

Improvement

No improvement

No further action

No further action

Longer-term, low-
dose treatment. 
Consider upper GI 
endoscopy

Improvement

Test for H. pylori

+ve

 to eradicate H. pylori;† 
review after 4 wks

No improvement

No†

Urea breath test. 
H. pylori eradicated?

Yes

Proceed as for H. pylori -ve 
dyspepsia above

Fig 6.14  See NICE dyspepsia guidelines.4
*Nothing magical happens on the 55th birthday—this is simply an inflection point in population risk data. 
We should not be overly rigid in applying these rules to the patient in front of us—though those who hold the 
purse strings may at time seek to reduce costs by strict enforcement of such guidelines.
†Don’t treat +ve cases of H. pylori more than twice. If still +ve refer for specialist opinion.

Fig 6.15  Endoscopic image of a duodenal ulcer
©Dr Jon Simmons.

_OHCM_10e.indb   253

_OHCM_10e.indb   253

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

254

Gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux disease (GORD)

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

GORD is common, and caused by reﬂ ux of stomach contents (acid ± bile)8 causing 
troublesome symptoms and/or complications.  If reﬂ ux is prolonged, it may cause 
oesoph agitis (ﬁ g 6.16), benign oesophageal stricture, or Barrett’s oesophagus (ﬁ g 
6.17 and p695; it is pre-malignant). Causes Lower oesophageal sphincter hypoten-
sion, hiatus hernia (see BOX), oesophageal dysmotility (eg systemic sclerosis), obesity, 
gastric acid hypersecretion, delayed gastric emptying, smoking, alcohol, pregnancy, 
drugs (tricyclics, anti cholinergics, nitrates), Helicobacter pylori?9
Symptoms Oesophageal: Heartburn (burning, retrosternal discomfort after meals, 
lying, stooping, or straining, relieved by antacids); belching; acid brash (acid or bile 
regurgitation); waterbrash ( salivation: ‘My mouth ﬁ lls with saliva’); odynophagia 
(painful  swallowing,  eg  from  oesophagitis  or  ulceration).  Extra-oesophageal: 
Nocturnal asthma, chronic cough, laryngitis (hoarseness, throat clearing), sinusitis.
Complications  Oesophagitis,  ulcers,  benign  stricture,  iron-deﬁ ciency.  Metaplasia 
dysplasianeoplasia:  GORD  may  lead  to  Barrett’s  oesophagus  (p695;  distal  oe-
sophageal epithelium undergoes metaplasia from squamous to columnar, ﬁ g 6.17). 
0.1–0.4%/yr of those with Barrett’s progress to oesophageal cancer (higher if dys-
plasia is present).
 Oesophagitis from corrosives, NSAIDS, herpes, Candida; duodenal or gastric ul-
cers or cancers; non-ulcer dyspepsia; oesophageal spasm; cardiac disease.
Tests  Endoscopy  if  dysphagia,  or  if  ≥55yrs  old  with  alarm  symptoms  (p252)  or 
with  treatment-refractory  dyspepsia.  24h  oesophageal  pH  monitoring  ±  manom-
etry help diagnose GORD when endoscopy is normal.
Treatment Lifestyle: Weight loss; smoking cessation; small, regular meals; reduce 
hot drinks, alcohol, citrus fruits, tomatoes, onions, ﬁ zzy drinks, spicy foods, caff eine, 
chocolate; avoid eating < 3h before bed. Raise the bed head.
Drugs: Antacids, eg magnesium trisilicate mixture (10mL/8h), or alginates, eg Gav-
iscon® (10–20mL/8h PO) relieve symptoms. Add a PPI, eg lansoprazole 30mg/24h PO. 
For refractory symptoms, add an H2 blocker and/or try twice-daily PPI. Avoid drugs 
aff ecting oesophageal motility (nitrates, anticholinergics, Ca2+ channel blockers—re-
lax the lower oesophageal sphincter) or that damage mucosa (NSAIDS, K+ salts, bis-
phosphonates).
Surgery:  (Eg  laparoscopic  Nissen  fundoplication,  or  novel  options  including 
laparoscopic  insertion  of  a  magnetic  bead  band  or  radiofrequency-induced 
hypertrophy.)  These  all  aim  to   resting  lower  oesophageal  sphincter  pressure. 
Consider  in  severe  GORD  (conﬁ rm  by  pH-monitoring/manometry)  if  drugs  are  not 
working.  Atypical  symptoms  (cough,  laryngitis)  are  less  likely  to  improve  with 
surgery compared to patients with typical symptoms.

Fig  6.16  Upper  GI  endoscopy  showing  longi-
tudinal mucosal breaks in severe oesophagitis.

Fig 6.17  Barrett’s oesophagus.

©Dr A Mee.

©Dr A Mee.

8  The reﬂ ux of duodenal ﬂ uid, pancreatic secretions and bile may be as important as acid; it may re-
spond to similar lifestyle measures, sucralfate (2g/12h PO), domperidone, or metoclopramide.
9    H. pylori association with GORD controversial, but eradication may help symptoms.

_OHCM_10e.indb   254

_OHCM_10e.indb   254

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Hiatus hernia
Sliding hiatus hernia (80%) The gastro-oesophageal junction slides up into the 
chest—see ﬁ g 6.18. Acid reﬂ ux often happens as the lower oesophageal sphincter 
becomes less competent in many cases.
Paraoesophageal hernia (rolling hiatus hernia) (20%) The gastro-oesophageal 
junction remains in the abdomen but a bulge of stomach herniates up into the 
chest alongside the oesophagus—see ﬁ gs 6.18, 6.19. As the gastro-oesophageal 
junction remains intact, GORD is less common.
Clinical features Common: 30% of patients >50yrs, especially obese women. Al-
though most small hernias are asymptomatic, patients with large hernias may 
develop GORD.
Imaging Upper GI endoscopy vis ualizes the mucosa (?oesophagitis) but cannot 
reliably exclude a hiatus hernia.
Treatment Lose weight. Treat GORD. Surgery indications: intractable symptoms 
despite aggressive medical therapy, complications (see p254). Although paraoe-
sophageal hernias may strangulate the risk of this drops dramatically after 65 
yrs. Prophylactic repair is only undertaken in those considered at high risk, due to 
operative mortality (≈1–2%).

255

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig 6.19  CT chest (IV contrast) showing the roll-
ing components of a hiatus hernia ant erior to the 
oesophagus.  Between  the  oesophagus  and  the 
vertebral column on the left-hand side is the aorta.
©Dr S Golding.

Fig 6.18  Hiatus hernia—sliding and rolling. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   255

_OHCM_10e.indb   255

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

256

Upper gastrointestinal bleeding  

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

syndrome.

gastropathy

steroids, thrombolytics, 
anticoagulants)

Rare causes
 • Bleeding disorders
 • Portal hypertensive 

 • Oesophagitis
 • Duodenitis
 • Malignancy
 • No obvious cause

Common causes
 • Peptic ulcers
 • Mallory–Weiss tear
 • Oesophageal varices
 • Gastritis/gastric erosions
 • Drugs (NSAIDS, aspirin, 

 • Aorto-enteric ﬁ stula10
 • Angiodysplasia
 • Haemobilia
 • Dieulafoy lesion11
 • Meckel’s diverticulum
 • Peutz–Jeghers’ syndrome
 • Osler–Weber–Rendu 

Haematemesis is vomiting of blood. It may be bright red or look like coff ee grounds. 
Melaena (Greek melas = black) means black motions, often like tar, and has a char-
acteristic smell of altered blood. Both indicate upper GI bleeding.
Take  a  brief  history  and 
examine to assess severity. 
Ask  about  past  GI  bleeds; 
dyspepsia/known 
ulcers; 
known liver disease or oes-
(p257); 
ophageal  varices 
dysphagia; 
vomiting; 
weight  loss.  Check  drugs 
(see  BOX  on  common  and 
rare  causes)  and  alcohol 
use.  Is  there  serious  co-
morbidity  (bad  prognosis), 
eg  cardiovascular  disease, 
respiratory  disease,  hepatic  or  renal  impairment,  or  malignancy?  Look  for  signs 
of  chronic  liver  disease  (p276)  and  do  a  PR  to  check  for  melaena.  Is  the  patient 
shocked? Also:
  • Peripherally cool/clammy; capillary reﬁ ll time >2s; urine output <0.5mL/kg/h.
  • GCS (tricky to assess in decompensated liver disease) or encephalopathy (p275).
  • Tachycardic (pulse >100bpm).
  • Systolic BP <100mmHg; postural drop >20mmHg.
  • Calculate the Rockall score (tables 6.6, 6.7).
Acute management (p820.) Skill in resuscitation determines survival, so get good 
at this! Summary:5 start by protecting the airway and giving high-ﬂ ow O2, then:
  Insert 2 large-bore (14–16G) IV cannulae and take blood for FBC (early Hb may be 
normal because haemodilution has not yet taken place), U&E (urea out of propor-
tion to creatinine indicative of massive blood meal), LFT, clotting, and crossmatch.
  Give  IV  ﬂ uids  (p821)  to  restore  intravascular  volume  while  waiting  for  cross-
matched  blood.  If  haemodynamically  deteriorating  despite  ﬂ uid  resuscitation, 
give group O RhΩve blood. Avoid saline if cirrhotic/varices.
  Insert a urinary catheter and monitor hourly urine output.
  Organize a CXR, ECG, and check ABG.
  Consider a CVP line to monitor and guide ﬂ uid replacement.
  Transfuse (with crossmatched blood if needed) if signiﬁ cant Hb drop (<70g/L).
  Correct clotting abnormalities (vitamin K (p274), FFP, platelets).
  If suspicion of varices then give terlipressin IV eg 1–2mg/6h for ≤3d; relative risk 

of death  by 34%.  Initiate broad-spectrum IV antibiotic cover.

  Monitor pulse, BP, and CVP (keep >5cmH2O) at least hourly until stable.
  Arrange an urgent endoscopy (p248).
  If  endoscopic  control  fails,  surgery  or  emergency  mesenteric  angiography/
embolization  may  be  needed.  For  uncontrolled  oesophageal  variceal  bleeding, 
a  Sengstaken–Blakemore  tube  may  compress  the  varices,  but  should  only  be 
placed by someone with experience.

Further  management  Anatomy  is  important  in  assessing  risk  of  rebleeding. 
Posterior DUs are highest risk as they are nearest to the gastroduodenal artery.
  • Re-examine after 4h and consider the need for FFP if >4 units transfused.
  • Hourly pulse, BP, CVP, urine output (4hrly if haemo dynamically stable may be OK).
  • Transfuse to keep Hb >70g/L; ensure a current valid group & save sample.
  • Check FBC, U&E, LFT, and clotting daily.
  • Keep nil by mouth if at high rebleed risk  (see  BOX ‘Management of peptic ulcer 

bleeds’ and p256)—ask the endoscopist.

10  A patient with an aortic graft repair and upper GI bleeding is considered to have an aorto-enteric ﬁ stula 
until proven otherwise: CT abdomen is usually required as well as endoscopy.
11  A Dieulafoy lesion is the rupture of an unusually big arteriole, eg in the fundus of the stomach.

_OHCM_10e.indb   256

_OHCM_10e.indb   256

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

257

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Rockall risk-scoring for upper GI bleeds
Table 6.6  Rockall score calculation
Pre-endoscopy 0 pts
Age
Shock: systolic 
BP & pulse rate
Comorbidity

<60yrs
BP >100mmHg
Pulse <100/min
Nil major

Post-endoscopy 
Diagnosis

Signs of recent 
haemorrhage 
on endoscopy

Mallory–Weiss tear; 
no lesion; no sign of 
recent bleeding
None, or dark red 
spot

1 pt
60–79yrs
BP >100mmHg
Pulse >100/min
Heart failure; 
ischaemic 
heart disease
All other 
diagnoses

3 pts

Metast ases

2 pts
≥80yrs
BP <100mmHg

Renal failure
Liver failure

Upper GI malig-
nancy

Blood in 
upper GI tract; 
adherent clot; 
visible vessel

Initial Rockall score is based on pre-endoscopy criteria; these are added to post-
endoscopy criteria for ﬁ nal score which predicts risk of rebleeding and death (ta-
ble 6.7). The Glas  gow  Blatchford  score (GBS) is used pre-endoscopy to identify 
patients at low risk of requiring intervention. If GBS ≈ 0, admission can be avoid-
ed—ie Hb 130g/L (or 120g/L if ); systolic BP 110mmHg; pulse <100/min; urea 
<6.5mmol/L; no melaena or syncope + no past/present liver disease or heart failure.
Table 6.7  GI bleed mortality by Rockall score
Score
  0
1
2
3
  4
5
6
7
  8+

0.2%
2.4%
5.6%
11.0%
24.6%
39.6%
48.9%
50.0%
–

0%
0%
0.2%
2.9%
5.3%
10.8%
17.3%
27.0%
41.1%

Mortality with initial scoring

Mortality after endoscopy

Management of peptic ulcer bleeds based on endoscopic ﬁ ndings

High-risk Active bleeding, adherent clot, or non-bleeding visible vessel. Achieve 
endoscopic haemostasis (2 of: clips, cautery, adrenaline). Admit to monitored bed; 
start PPI (eg omeprazole 40mg/12h IV/PO; meta-analyses show 72h IVI eg omepra-
zole 80mg bolus then 8mg/h not superior). If haemodynamically stable start oral 
intake of clear liquids 6h after endoscopy. Treat if positive for H. pylori (p253).
Low-risk Flat,  pigmented  spot  or  clean  base.  No  need  for  endoscopic  haemo-
stasis. Consider early discharge if patient otherwise low risk. Give oral PPI (p252). 
Regular diet 6h after endoscopy if stable. Treat if positive for H. pylori (p253).

Gastro-oesophageal varices
Submucosal venous dilatation 2° to portal pressures (may not have documented 
liver disease—suspect varices if alcohol history); bleeding can be brisk, particularly 
if underlying coagulopathy 2° to loss of hepatic synthesis of clotting factors.
Causes of portal hypertension Pre-hepatic: Thrombosis (portal or splenic vein). 
Intra-hepatic: Cirrhosis (80% in UK); schistosomiasis (commonest worldwide); sar-
coid; myeloproliferative diseases; congenital hepatic ﬁ brosis. Post-hepatic: Budd–
Chiari syndrome (p696); right heart failure; constrictive pericarditis; veno-occlusive 
disease. Risk factors for variceal bleeds: Portal pressure, variceal size, endo-
scopic features of the variceal wall and advanced liver disease.
Management  Endoscopic  banding  (oesophageal)  or  sclerotherapy  (gastric). 
Prophylaxis: 1°: ~30% of cirrhotics with varices bleed vs ~15% with non-selective 
-blockade (propranolol 20–40mg/12h PO) or repeat endoscopic banding. 2°: after a 
1st variceal bleed, 60% rebleed within 1yr. Use banding and non-selective -blockade; 
transjugular intrahepatic porto–systemic shunt (TIPS) for resistant varices.

_OHCM_10e.indb   257

_OHCM_10e.indb   257

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
 
 
 
258

Diarrhoea 

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Diarrhoea is characterized by increased stool frequency and volume and decreased 
consistency—though patients’ perspectives of these may vary wildly.
History As ever, a careful history will help narrow myriad causes to just a few. Acute or 
chronic? If acute (<2wks) suspect gastroenteritis—any risk factors: Travel? Diet change? 
Contact with D&V? Any fever/pain? HIV; achlorhydria, eg PA, p334, or on acid suppressants, 
eg PPI? Chronic diarrhoea alternating with constipation sugg ests irritable bowel (p266). 
Weight, noct ur nal diarrhoea, or anaemia mandate close follow-up (coeliac/UC/Crohn’s?).
Bloody diarrhoea: Campylobacter, Shigella/Salmonella (p431), E. coli, amoebiasis 
(p432), UC, Crohn’s, colorectal cancer (p616), colonic polyps, pseudomembranous co-
litis, ischaemic colitis (p620). Fresh PR bleeding: p629.
Mucus: Occurs in IBS (p266), colorectal cancer, and polyps.
Frank pus: Suggests IBD, diver ticulitis, or a ﬁ stula/abscess.
Explosive: Eg cholera; Giardia; Yersinia (p425); Rotavirus.
Steatorrhoea:  Characterized  by  gas,  off ensive  smell,  and  ﬂ oating,  hard-to-ﬂ ush 
stools—consider pancreatic insuffi  ciency (p267) or biliary obstruction.
Look  for  Dehydration—dry  mucous  membranes,  skin  turgor;  capillary  reﬁ ll  >2s; 
shock. Any fever, weight, clubbing, anaemia, oral ulcers (p246), rashes or abdominal 
mass or scars? Any goitre/hyperthyroid signs? Do rectal exam for masses (eg rectal 
cancer) or impacted faeces:
  • Blood: FBC: MCV/Fe deﬁ ciency, eg coeliac or colon ca; MCV if alcohol abuse or B12 ab-
sorption, eg in coeliac or Crohn’s; eosinophilia if parasites. ESR/CRP: infection, Crohn’s/
UC, cancer. U&E: K+ ≈ severe D&V. TSH: thyrotoxicosis. Coeliac serology: p266.

  • Stool:  MC&S:  bacterial  pathogens,  ova  cysts,  parasites,  C.  diff  toxin  (CDT,  see  BOX 
‘Causes of diarrhoea’), viral PCR. Faecal elastase: if suspect chronic pancreatitis (ma-
labsorption, steatorrhoea). 

  • Lower GI endoscopy: (Malignancy? colitis?) If acutely unwell, limited ﬂ exible sim-
goidoscopy with biopsies. Full colonoscopy (including terminal ileum) can assess for 
more proximal disease If normal, con sider small bowel radiology or video capsule.
Management Treat cause. Food handlers: no work until stool samples are –ve. If a 
hospital outbreak, wards may need closing. Oral rehydration is better than IV, but if 
sustained diarrhoea or vomiting, IV ﬂ uids with appropriate electrolyte replacement 
may be needed. Codeine phosphate 30mg/8h PO or loperamide 2mg PO after each loose 
stool (max 16mg/day) stool frequency (avoid in colitis; both may precipitate toxic 
megacolon).  Avoid  antibiotics  unless  infective  diarrhoea  is  causing  systemic  upset 
(ﬁ g 6.20). Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea12 may respond to probiotics (eg lactobacilli).

Causes of diarrhoea
Common
  • Gastroenteritis (p428)
  • Traveller’s diarrhoea (p429)
  • C. difﬁ cile (BOX ‘Clostridium difﬁ cile’)
  • IBS (p266)
  • Colorectal cancer
  • Crohn’s; UC; coeliac.
Less common causes (Esp. if painful)
  • Microscopic colitis13
  • Chronic pancreatitis
  • Bile salt malabsorption
  • Laxative abuse
  • Lactose intolerance
  • Ileal/gastric resection
  • Overﬂ ow diarrhoea
  • Bacterial overgrowth.

Non-GI or rare causes
  • Thyrotoxicosis
  • Autonomic neuropathy
  • Addison’s disease
  • Ischaemic colitis
  • Tropical sprue 
  • Gastrinoma 
  • Carcinoid   
Drugs
(Many, see BNF.)
  • Antibiotics12 
  • Propran olol 
  • Cytotoxics  
  • Laxatives   

•Pellagra
•VIPoma14
•Amyloid.

• PPI
• NSAIDS
• Digoxin
• Alcohol.

12  Erythromycin is prokinetic, others cause overgrowth of bowel organisms, or alter bile acids.
13  Think of this in any chronic watery diarrhoea; diagnosis by biopsy. Associated with a range of drugs 
including NSAIDS and PPIS. Stop the off ending drug where possible. Treat with budesonide.
14  Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumour; suspect if  K+and acidosis;  Ca2+;  Mg2+.

_OHCM_10e.indb   258

_OHCM_10e.indb   258

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

259

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Managing infective diarrhoea*

No systemic signs

Systemic illness:
  • Fever >39°C; dehydration
  • Diarrhoea + visible blood 
(=dysentery) for >2wks

Symptomatic 

  • Admit to hospital; oral ﬂ uids
  • Consider presumptive † unl ess 
a non-infectious cause is found

Stool culture 
not needed

Prompt, direct faecal 
smear (then culture)

Special circumstances:
  • Food poisoning 

outbreak

  • Travel (p428 & p430)
  • Recent antibiotic use
  • Rectal intercourse
  • Immunocompromised
  • Raw seafood ingestion

Routine culture 
and microscopy. Ask 
microbiologist about 

Polymorphs seen

No polymorphs seen

Parasites seen

Likely culture:
  • Shigella†
  • Campylobacter
  • E. coli
More rarely:
  • C. difﬁ cile (see BOX 

‘Clostridium difﬁ cile’)
  • Yersinia enterocolitica
  • Salmonella

Likely culture:
  • Salmonella†
  • E. coli
  • C. difﬁ cile (see BOX 

‘Clostridium difﬁ cile’)

Culture Ωve causes:
  • eg Norovirus (eg with 
projectile vomiting, 
p430)

Speciﬁ c , eg 
p432–435

Fig 6.20  Managing infective diarrhoea.
*Be aware of local pathogens, and be prepared to close wards and hospitals if contagion is afoot.
†Prompt speciﬁ c : eg ciproﬂ oxacin 500mg/12h PO for 6d may be needed before sensitivities are known. 
Metronidazole is also tried, as Giardia is a common cause of watery diarrhoea in travellers.

Clostridium difﬁ cile: the cause of pseudomembranous colitis
First isolated from stools of healthy neonates, C. difﬁ cile was named owing to dif-
ﬁ culties in culture. Today, ‘difﬁ cile’ might better refer to challenges of containment.
Signs:  T°;  colic;  diarrhoea  with  systemic  upset—CRP,  WCC,  albumin,  and 
colitis  (with  yellow  adherent  plaques  on  inﬂ amed  non-ulcerated  mucosa—the 
pseudomembrane) progressing to toxic megacolon and multi-organ failure.
Asymptomatic carriage: 2–5% of all adults. Only problematic with gut ecology 
disrupted by, eg antibiotics, leading to rapid proliferation and toxin expression.
Predictors of fulminant C. diff colitis: >70yrs, past C. diff infection; use of anti-
peristaltic drugs; severe leucocytosis; haemodynamic instability.
Detection:  Urgent  testing  of  suspicious  stool  (characteristic  smell—ask  the 
nurses). Two-stage process with rapid screening test for C. diff protein (or PCR) 
followed by speciﬁ c ELISA for toxins. AXR for toxic megacolon.
: Stop causative antibiotic if possible. Mild disease: metronidazole 400mg/8h PO for 
10–14d (vanco mycin 125mg/6h PO is better in severe disease). Intensive regimens of 
vancomycin 500mg/6h with IV and PR vancomycin may be needed for non-respond-
ers. Urgent colectomy may be needed if toxic megacolon, LDH, or if deteriorating.
Recurrent disease: Common (≈25%). Fidaxomicin, a minimally absorbed oral an-
tibiotic, is associated with lower relapse rates. Faecal transplantation (introduction 
of a suspension prepared from the faeces of a screened donor via endoscopy or via 
NG/NJ tube) is a highly eff ective, if aesthetically unappealing, method of treatment.
Preventing spread: Meticulous cleaning and appropriate bed management policies, 
use of disposable gloves and aprons, hand-washing (not just gel—kill the spores).

_OHCM_10e.indb   259

_OHCM_10e.indb   259

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

260

Constipation

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Constipation reﬂ ects pelvic dysfunction or transit time. Accepted deﬁ nitions and 
reported rates vary, but a place to start is the passage of ≤2 bowel motions/wk, 
often passed with diffi  culty, straining, or pain, and a sense of incomplete evacua-
tion. :≈2:1. Doctors’ chief concerns are to ﬁ nd pointers to major pathology, eg 
constip ation + rectal  bleeding ≈ cancer;  constipation + distension + active  bowel 
sounds ≈ stricture/GI obstruction; constipation + menorrhagia ≈ hypothyroidism.
The patient Ask about frequency, nature, and consistency of stools. Is there blood 
or mucus in/on the stools? Is there diarrhoea alternating with constipation (eg IBS, 
p266)? Has there been recent change in bowel habit? Is she digitating the rectum 
or vagina to pass stool?15 Ask about diet and drugs. PR examination is essential 
even when referring (refer if signs of colorectal ca, eg weight, pain, or anaemia).
Tests  None  in  young,  mildly  aff ected  patients.  Threshold  for  investigation  di-
minishes  with  age;  triggers  include:6  weight,  abdominal  mass,  +PR  blood,  iron 
deﬁ ciency anaemia. Blood: FBC, ESR, U&E, Ca2+, TFT. Colonoscopy: If suspected colo-
rectal  malignancy.  Transit  studies;  anorectal  physiology;  biopsy  for  Hirschprung’s 
are occasionally needed.
Treatment Often reassurance, drinking more, and diet/exercise advice (p245) is 
all  that  is  needed.  Treat  causes  (BOX ‘Causes  of  constipation’).  A  high-ﬁ bre  diet 
is often advised, but may cause bloating without helping constipation.  Only use 
drugs  if  these  measures  fail,  and  try  to  use  them  for  short  periods  only.  Often, 
a stimulant such as senna ± a bulking agent is more eff ective and cheaper than 
agents  such  as  lactulose.  Bulking  agents:  Faecal  mass,  so  stimulating  peristal-
sis. They must be taken with plenty of ﬂ uid and may take a few days to act. CI: 
diffi  culty  in  swallowing;  GI  obstruction;  colonic  atony;  faecal  impaction.  Bran 
powder 3.5g 2–3 times/d with food (may hinder absorption of dietary trace ele-
ments  if  taken  with  every  meal).   Ispaghula  husk,  eg  1  Fybogel®  sachet  after  a 
meal, mixed in water and swallowed promptly (or else it becomes an unpleasant 
sludge).  Methylcellulose,  eg  Celevac®  3–6  tablets/12h  with  ≥300mL  water.  Ster-
culia, eg Normacol® granules, 10mL sprinkled on food daily. Stimulant laxatives: 
Increase intestinal motility, so do not use in intestinal obstruction or acute colitis. 
Avoid  prolonged  use  as  it  may  cause  colonic  atony.  Abdominal  cramps  are  an 
important SE. Pure stimulant laxatives are bisacodyl tablets (5–10mg at night) or 
suppositories (10mg in the mornings) and senna (2–4 tablets at night). Docusate 
sodium  and  dantron16  have  stimulant  and  softening  actions.  Glycerol  supposito-
ries  act  as  a  rectal  stimulant.  Sodium  picosulfate  (5–10mg  at  night)  is  a  potent 
stimulant. Stool softeners: Particularly useful when managing painful anal condi-
tions, eg ﬁ ssure. Arachis oil enemas lubricate and soften impacted faeces. Liquid 
paraffi  n should not be used for a prolonged period (SE: anal seepage, lipoid pneu-
monia, malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins). Osmotic laxatives: Retain ﬂ uid in 
the  bowel.  Lactulose,  a  semisynthetic  disaccharide,  produces  osmotic  diarrhoea 
of  low  faecal  pH  that  discourages  growth  of  ammonia-producing  organisms.  It 
is  useful  in  hepatic  enceph alopathy  (initial  dose:  30–50mL/12h).  SE:  bloating,  so 
its role in treating constipation is limited. Macrogol (eg Movicol®) is another ex-
ample. Magnesium salts (eg magnesium hydroxide; magnesium sulfate) are use-
ful  when  rapid  bowel  evacuation  is  required.  Sodium  salts  (eg  Microlette®  and 
Micralax®  enemas)  should  be  avoided  as  they  may  cause  sodium  and  water  re-
tention. Phosphate enemas are useful for rapid bowel evacuation prior to proce-
dures.
If these don’t help Prucalopride is an elective 5HT4 agonist with prokinetic prop-
erties; Lubiprostone  is a chloride-channel activator that increases intestinal ﬂ uid 
secretion; Linaclotide is a guanylate cyclase-C agonist that also increases ﬂ uid se-
cretion and decreases visceral pain. A multidisciplinary approach with behaviour 
therapy, habit training ± sphincter biofeedback may help.

15    Rectocele: front wall of the rectum bulges into the back wall of the vagina.
16    Dantron causes colon & liver tumours in animals, so reserve use for the very elderly or terminally ill.

_OHCM_10e.indb   260

_OHCM_10e.indb   260

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Causes of constipation
General
  • Poor diet ± lack of exercise
  • Poor ﬂ uid intake/dehydration
  • Irritable bowel syndrome
  • Old age
  • Post-operative pain
  • Hospital environment (priv acy; hav-

ing to use a bed pan).

Anorectal disease (Esp. if painful.)
 Anal or colorectal cancer
  • Fissures (p630), strictures, herpes
  • Rectal prolapse
  • Proctalgia fugax (p630)
  • Mucosal ulceration/neoplasia
  • Pelvic  muscle  dysfunction/levator 

ani syndrome.

Intestinal obstruction
  Colorectal carcinoma (p616)
  • Strictures (eg Crohn’s disease)
  • Pelvic mass (eg fetus, ﬁ broids)
  • Diverticulosis  (rectal  bleeding  is  a 

commoner presentation)
  • Pseudo-obstruction (p611).
Metabolic/endocrine
  • Hypercalcaemia (p676)
  • Hypothyroidism 

(rarely  presents 

with constipation)

261

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

  • Hypokalaemia (p674)
  • Porphyria
  • Lead poisoning.
Drugs (Pre-empt by diet advice.)
  • Opiates (eg morphine, codeine)
  • Anticholinergics (eg tricyclics)
  • Iron
  • Some antacids, eg with aluminium
  • Diuretics, eg furosemide
  • Calcium channel blockers.
Neuromuscular  (Slow  transit  from 
decreased propulsive activity.)
  • Spinal or pelvic nerve injury (eg trau-

ma, surgery)
  • Aganglionosis 

(Chagas’  disease, 

Hirschsprung’s disease)

  • Systemic sclerosis
  • Diabetic neuropathy.
Other causes
  • Chronic  laxative  abuse  (rare—diar-

rhoea is commoner)
  • Idiopathic slow transit
  • Idiopathic megarectum/colon.

Deﬁ ning gastrointestinal dysfunction—the Rome criteria
‘Here was history in the stones of the street and the atoms of the sunshine... 
she went about in a kind of repressed ecstasy of contemplation, seeing often... 
a great deal more than was there.’

Henry James, The Portrait of a Lady.
While the tools of contemporary gastroenterology are well placed to explore the 
comparatively simple domains of structural lesions and inﬂ ammation, for those 
patients troubled by ‘functional’ disorders of motility and pain, we lack methods 
to understand nervous activity in their guts. Instead, unlike James’ heroine Isabel 
Archer, as she explored late 19th-century Rome, we are left seeing a greal deal less 
than perhaps is there. The failure to see, then becomes a failure to comprehend 
(the endoscopy and CT were normal, so there must be nothing wrong?)—then a 
failure to believe and ultimately to treat an illness.

Before we subject any intervention to the rigors of medical trials, we should ﬁ rst 
agree a classiﬁ cation of the disease process we are aiming to treat. Some of medi-
cine’s darkest alcoves reﬂ ect less a lack of potential treatments and more a lack of 
any agreement on where classiﬁ cation boundaries lie. Failure to deﬁ ne and distin-
guish pathologies then leads to a literature studded with small conﬂ icting studies 
on heterogeneous patients which feeds a perception of a condition as ‘untreatable’.
There is nothing romantic about constipation, and gastrointestinal dysfunction 
in general, other than the association of the deﬁ nitions of these disorders with 
Rome. By the late 1980s, these confused areas exempliﬁ ed the above-described 
challenges. Recognition of the need for order and classiﬁ cation to support studies 
led to an international collaboration, born out of the University of Rome. A process 
of expert debate and discussion reached consensus deﬁ nitions that could support 
scientiﬁ c studies. The experts then periodically reconvene in the eternal city to 
revisit and evaluate these ‘Rome consensus’ deﬁ nitions. Rather more prosaically, 
the Rome foundation itself is now headquartered in Raleigh, North Carolina, USA. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   261

_OHCM_10e.indb   261

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
262

Ulcerative colitis (UC)

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

UC is a relapsing and remitting inﬂ ammatory disorder of the colonic mucosa. It may 
aff ect just the rectum (proctitis, as in ~30%) or extend to involve part of the colon (left-
sided colitis, in ~40%) or the entire colon (pancolitis, in ~30%). It ‘never’ spreads proxi-
mal to the ileocaecal valve (except for backwash ileitis). Cause Inappropriate immune 
response against (?abnormal) colonic ﬂ ora in genetically susceptibile individuals. Pa-
thology Hyperaemic/haemorrhagic colonic mucosa ± pseudo polyps formed by in-
ﬂ ammation. Punctate ulcers may extend deep into the lamina propria—inﬂ ammation 
is norm ally not transmural. Continuous inﬂ ammation limited to the mucosa diff erenti-
ates it from Crohn’s disease. Prevalence 100–200/100 000. Incid ence 10–20/100 000/
yr; typically presents ~20–40yrs. UC is 3-fold as common in non-smokers (the opposite 
is true for Crohn’s disease)—symptoms may relapse on stopping smoking.
Symptoms  Episodic  or  chronic  diarrhoea (±   blood & mucus);  crampy  abdom inal 
dis comfort;  bowel  frequency  relates  to  severity  (see  table  6.8);  urgency/tenes-
mus ≈ proctitis. Systemic symptoms in attacks: fever, malaise, anorexia, weight.
Signs May be none. In acute, severe UC there may be fever, tachycardia, and a ten-
der, distended abdomen. Extraintestinal signs: Clubbing; aphthous oral ulcers; ery-
thema  nodosum  (p265);  pyoderma  gangrenosum;  conjunctivitis;  episcleritis;  iritis; 
large joint arthritis; sacroiliitis; ankylosing spondylitis; PSC (p282); nutritional deﬁ cits.
Tests  Blood:  FBC,  ESR,  CRP,  U&E,  LFT,  blood  culture.  Stool  MC&S/CDT: (See  p258.) To 
exclude  Campylobacter,  C. difﬁ cile, Sal monella, Shigella, E. coli, amoebae.  Faecal 
calprotectin: A simple, non-invasive test for GI inﬂ ammation with high sensitivity. 
AXR: No faecal shadows; mucosal thickening/islands (ﬁ g 16.9, p729); colonic dilata-
tion (see ‘Complications’). Lower GI endoscopy: Limited ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy if 
acute to assess and biopsy; full colonoscopy once controlled to deﬁ ne disease extent 
(see p249, ﬁ g 6.10).
Table 6.8  Assessing severity in UC (Truelove & Witts criteria modiﬁ ed to include CRP)
Severe UC
Variable
≥6
Motions/day
Large
Rectal bleeding
>37.8°C
>90 beats/min
<105g/L
>30 (or CRP >45mg/L)

T°C
Resting pulse
Haemoglobin
ESR (do CRP too)
Data from Truelove et al., ‘Cortisone in ulcerative colitis’, BMJ; 2(4947): 1041–8.
Complications Acute: Toxic dilatation of colon (mucosal islands, colonic diameter 
>6cm) with risk of perforation; venous thromboembolism: give prophylaxis to all in-
patients regardless of rectal bleeding (p350); K+ Chronic: Colonic cancer: risk related 
to disease extent and activity ≈5–10% with pancolitis for 20yrs. Neoplasms may oc-
cur in ﬂ at, normal-looking mucosa. To spot precursor areas of dysplasia, surveillance 
colonoscopy eg 1–5yrs (depending on risk), with multiple random biopsies or biopsies 
guided by diff erential uptake by abnormal mucosa of dye sprayed endoscopically.
Treatment Goals are to induce, then maintain disease remission.7
Mild UC: • 5-ASA,17 eg mesalazine (=mesalamine) is the mainstay for remission-induc-
tion/maintenance.  Given  PR (suppositories  or  enemas)  for  distal  disease  (eg  Pen-
tasa® 1g daily); or PO for more extensive disease (eg Pentasa® 2g daily; once-daily 
dosing as eff ective as split dose; combine PR+PO if ﬂ are). • Topical steroid foams PR (eg 
hydrocortisone as Colifoam®), or prednisolone 20mg retention enemas (Predsol®) 
less eff ective than PR 5-ASA but may be added in addition.
Moderate  UC: If 4–6 motions/day, but otherwise well, induce remission with oral 
prednisolone 40mg/d for 1wk, then taper by 5mg/week over following 7wks. Then 
maintain on 5-ASA (SES: rash, haemolysis, hep atitis, pancreatitis, paradoxical wors-
ening of colitis monitor FBC and U&E at start, then at 3 months, then annually).

Mild UC
≤4
Small
Apyrexial
<70 beats/min
>110g/L
<30 

Moderate UC
5
Moderate
37.1–37.8°C
70–90 beats/min
105–110g/L

17  5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA or mesalazine) must be stabilized in oral preparations to survive gastric 
pH. Alternatively, olsalazine is a dimer of 5-ASA or balsalazide is a prodrug, both of which are cleaved in the 
colon. Rare hypersensitivity reactions: worsening colitis, pancreatitis, pericarditis, nephritis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   262

_OHCM_10e.indb   262

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

263

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Severe  UC: If unwell and 6 motions/d, admit for: IV hydration/electrolyte replace-
ment;  IV  steroids,  eg  hydrocortisone  100mg/6h  or  methylprednisolone  40mg/12h; 
rectal steroids, eg hydrocortisone 100mg in 100mL 0.9% saline/12h PR; thromboem-
bolism prophylaxis (p350); ensure multiple stool MC&S/CDT to exclude infection.
  • Monitor T°, pulse, and BP—and record stool frequency/character on a stool chart.
  • Twice-daily exam: document distension, bowel sounds, and tenderness.
  • Daily FBC, ESR, CRP, U&E ± AXR. Consider blood transfusion (eg if Hb <80g/L).
  • If on day 3–5 CRP >45 or >6 stools/d, action is needed.18 Rescue therapy with ciclo-
sporin or inﬂ iximab, can avoid colectomy, but involve surgeons early in shared care.
  • If improving, transfer to prednisolone PO (40mg/24h). Schedule maintenance inﬂ ixi-

mab if used for rescue, or azathioprine if ciclosporin rescue.

  • If fails to improve then urgent colectomy by d7–10—the challenge is not to delay 
surgery so long as to accumulate signiﬁ cant steroid exposure and debilitation that 
will delay post-surgical recovery.

It’s time for immunomodulation if... Patients ﬂ are on steroid tapering or require 
≥2 courses of steroids/year eg azathioprine (2–2.5mg/kg/d PO). 30% of patients will 
develop SES requiring treatment cessation including abdominal pain, nausea, pan-
creatitis, leucopenia, abnormal LFTS. Monitor FBC, U+E, LFT weekly for 4 wks, then every 
4 wks for 3 months, then at least 3-monthly.
Biologic therapy For patients intolerant of immunomodulation, or developing symp-
toms despite an immunomodulator, monoclonal antibodies to TNF (inﬂ iximab, adali-
mumab, golimumab) or to adhesion molecules involved in gut lymphocyte traffi  cking 
(vedolizumab) play an important role (see BOX ‘Therapies in Crohn’s disease’ p265).
Surgery This is needed at some stage in ~20%, eg subtotal colectomy + terminal 
ileostomy for failure of medical therapy or fulminant colitis with toxic dilatation/
perforation. Subsequently completion proctectomy (permanent stoma) vs ileo–anal 
pouch. Pouches mean stoma reversal and the possibility of long-term continence but 
pouch opening frequency may still be around 6≈/day and recurrent pouchitis can be 
troublesome (give anti biotics, eg metronidazole + ciproﬂ oxacin for 2wks).

Diagnosing IBD-unclassiﬁ ed (IBD-U)
After  full  investigation,  IBD  may  not  obviously  be  Crohn’s  or  UC.  IBD-U  refers 
to  isolated  colonic  IBD  where  the  diagnosis  remains  unknown  (small  bowel 
involvement=Crohn’s).  This  situation  is  rare  in  adults  but  commoner  in  children. 
Over time the phenotype tends to become clearer (generally UC>Crohn’s). Colecto-
my ± pouch formation may be needed, though pouch failure rate is higher than in UC.

18  Day 3 stool frequency >8≈/day or frequency 3–8≈/day & CRP >45 =85% chance of colectomy this admission.

_OHCM_10e.indb   263

_OHCM_10e.indb   263

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

264

Crohn’s disease 

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

A chronic inﬂ ammatory disease characterized by transmural granulomatous inﬂ am-
mation aff ecting any part of the gut from mouth to anus (esp. terminal ileum in 
~70%). Unlike UC, there is unaff ected bowel between areas of active disease (skip 
lesions). Cause As with UC an inappropriate immune response against the (?abnor-
mal) gut ﬂ ora in a genetically susceptible individual.19 Prevalence 100–200/100 000. 
Incidence 10–20/100 000/yr; typically presents ~20–40yrs. Associations Smoking 
risk ≈3–4; NSAIDS may exacerbate disease.
Symptoms  Diarrhoea,  abdominal  pain,  weight  loss/failure  to  thrive.  Systemic 
symptoms: fatigue, fever, malaise, anorexia.
Signs  Bowel  ulceration  (ﬁ g  6.22);  abdominal  tenderness/mass;  perianal  abscess/
ﬁ stulae/skin tags; anal strictures. Beyond the gut: (ﬁ g 6.21) Clubbing, skin, joint, & 
eye problems.
Complications Small bowel obstruction; toxic dilatation (colonic diameter >6cm, 
toxic dilatation is rarer than in UC); abscess formation (abdominal, pelvic, or peri-
anal); ﬁ stulae (present in ~10%), eg entero-enteric, colovesical (bladder), colovagi-
nal, perianal, enterocutaneous; perforation; colon cancer; PSC (p282), malnutrition.
Tests Blood:  FBC, ESR, CRP,  U&E, LFT, INR, ferritin, TIBC,  B12, folate. Stool:  MC&S and CDT 
(p258) to exclude eg C. difﬁ cile, Campylobacter, E. coli; faecal calprotectin is a sim-
ple,  non-invasive  test  for  GI inﬂ ammation  with  high  sensitivity.  Colonoscopy  +  bi-
opsy: Even if mucosa looks normal. Small bowel: To detect isolated proximal disease 
by eg capsule endoscopy (p248, use dummy patency capsule 1st that disintegrates if 
it gets stuck); MRI increasingly used to assess pelvic disease and ﬁ stulae, small bowel 
disease activity and strictures; US in skilled hands can provide small bowel imaging.
Treatment (See BOX.8) Find out how your patient deals with what may be a brutal 
disease (no intimacy...no sex...no hope...‘I live with this alone and will die alone’). With 
a collaborative approach, courage, attention to detail, and a dose of humour, this can 
change. Help quit smoking. Optimize nutrition. Assess severity: T°, pulse, ESR, 
WCC, CRP, + albumin may merit admission for IV steroids.
Mild–moderate: Symptomatic but systemically well. Prednisolone  40mg/d  PO for 
1wk, then taper by 5mg every wk for next 7wks. An alternative dietary approach 
based upon ‘elemental’ or ‘polymeric’ diets is eff ective in children but less used for 
adults. Plan maintenance therapy (see BOX).
Severe: Admit for  IV hydration/electrolyte replacement; IV steroids, eg hydrocorti-
sone  100mg/6h  or  methylprednisolone  40mg/12h;  thromboembolism  prophylaxis 
(p350); ensure multiple stool MC&S/CDT to exclude infection.
  • Monitor T°, pulse, BP, and record stool frequency/character on a stool chart.
  • Physical examination daily. Daily FBC, ESR, CRP, U&E, and plain AXR.
  • Consider need for blood transfusion (if Hb <80g/L) and nutritional support.
  • If improving switch to oral prednisolone (40mg/d). If not, biologics have a role.
  • Consider abdominal sepsis complicating Crohn’s disease especially if abdominal 
pain (ultrasound, CT, & MRI are often required to assess this). Seek surgical advice.
Perianal  disease:  Occurs  in  about  50%.  MRI  and  examination  under  anaesthetic 
(EUA) are an important part of assessment. Treatment includes oral antibiotics, im-
munosuppressant therapy ± anti-TNF, and local surgery ± seton insertion.

19  Much of the genetic risk is shared with UC—small diff erences in genetics combined with environmental 
modiﬁ ers may explain the very diff erent phenotypes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   264

_OHCM_10e.indb   264

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

265

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Therapies in Crohn’s disease
Azathioprine (AZA) (2–2.5mg/kg/d PO) used if refractory to steroids, relapsing on 
steroid taper, or requiring ≥2 steroid courses/yr. Takes 6–10wks to work. 30% will 
develop SES requiring treatment cessation including abdominal pain, nausea, pancre-
atitis, leucopenia, abnormal LFTS. Monitor FBC, U&E, LFT weekly for 4wks, then every 
4wks for 3 months, then at least 3-monthly. Alternative immunomodulators include 
6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate (CI:  of reproductive age).
5-ASA Unlike in UC, have no role in the management of Crohn’s.
Biologics Anti-TNF: TNF plays an important role in pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease, 
therefore monoclonal antibodies to TNF, eg inﬂ iximab and adalimumab, can disease 
activity. They counter neutrophil accumulation and granuloma formation and cause 
cytotoxicity to CD4+ T cells, thus clearing cells driving the immune response. These 
drugs play a vital role in both induction and maintenance therapy. CI: sepsis, active/
latent TB, LFT >3-fold above top end of normal. SE: rash. Avoid in people with known un-
derlying malignancy.  TB may reactivate when on inﬂ iximab, so screen patients before 
starting the treatment (CXR, PPD, interferon gamma release assay (IGRA)). Combined 
AZA and inﬂ iximab can  effi  cacy of  at 12 months, but there are long-term safety 
issues (eg increased lymphoma risk). Anti-integrin: Monoclonal antibodies targeting 
adhesion molecules involved in gut lymphocyte traffi  cking, eg vedolizumab, reduce 
disease activity and have a more gut-speciﬁ c mechanism of activiy. Anti-IL12/23: Rep-
resents a new cytokine target with an emerging role in treatment, eg ustekinumab.
Nutrition Enteral is preferred (eg polymeric diet); consider TPN as a last resort. 
Elemental  diets:  (Eg  E028®.)  Contain  amino  acids  and  can  give  remission.  Low 
residue diets: Help symptoms in those with active disease or strictures.
Surgery 50–80% need ≥1 operation in their life. It never cures. Indications: drug 
failure  (most  common);  GI  obstruction  from  stricture;  perforation;  ﬁ stulae;  ab-
scess. Surgical aims are: 1 resection of aff ected areas—but beware short bowel 
syndrome (p580) 2 to control perianal or ﬁ stulizing disease 3 defunction (rest) 
distal disease eg with a temporary ileostomy. Pouch surgery is avoided in Crohn’s 
(  risk of recurrence).
Poor prognosis Age <40yrs; steroids needed at 1st presentation; perianal disease; 
isolated terminal ileitis; smoking.

Fig  6.21  Beyond  the  gut...  ‘I  hate  how  this 
stupid  illness  is  crippling  me...’  As  well  as 
erythema  nodosum  on  the  shins  (above;  also 
caused by sarcoid, drugs, streptococci, and TB), 
Crohn’s can associate with sero Ωve arthritis of 
large or small joints, spondyloarthropathy, an-
kylosing spondylitis, sacroiliitis, pyoderma gan-
grenosum, conjunctivitis, episcleritis, and iritis.

Fig  6.22  Deep  ﬁ ssured  ulcers  seen  at  colon-
oscopy. The end result? ‘My family does not or 
will not even talk to me about the disease ... I 
don’t know when urgency to race for the bath-
room  will  happen  so  I  don’t  go  out  and  have 
been living a hermit life...’

©Dr A Mee.

_OHCM_10e.indb   265

_OHCM_10e.indb   265

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

266

Gastrointestinal malabsorption 

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Causes See BOX ‘Causes of gastrointestinal malabsorption’.
Symptoms Diarrhoea; weight; lethargy; steatorrhoea; bloating.
Deﬁ ciency  signs  Anaemia  (Fe,  B12,  folate);  bleeding  disorders  (vit  K);  oedema 
(protein); metabolic bone disease (vit D); neurological features, eg neuropathy.
Tests FBC ( or MCV); Ca2+; Fe; B12 + folate; INR; lipid proﬁ le; coeliac tests (see 
‘Coeliac disease’). Stool: Sudan stain for fat globules; stool microscopy (infestation); 
elastase. Breath hydrogen analysis: For bacterial overgrowth.20 Take samples of end-
expired air; give glucose; take more samples at ½h intervals; early exhaled hydrogen 
= overgrowth. Endoscopy + small bowel biopsy.
Infectious malabsorption Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli, Cyclospora 
cayetanensis, microsporidia. Tropical sprue: Villous atrophy + malabsorption occur-
ring in the Far and Middle East and Caribbean—the cause is unknown. Tetracycline 
250mg/6h PO + folic acid 5mg/d PO for 3–6mnths may help. 
Coeliac disease

Suspect this if diarrhoea + weight loss or anaemia (esp. if iron or  B12 ).  T-cell-
responses to gluten (alcohol-soluble proteins in wheat, barley, rye ± oats) in the small 
bowel causes villous atrophy and malabsorption. Associations HLA DQ2 in 95%; the 
rest are DQ8; autoimmune disease; dermatitis herpetiformis. Prevalence 1 in 100–300 
(commoner if Irish). Any age (peaks in childhood and 50–60yrs). : >1:1. Relative 
risk in 1st-degree relatives is 6≈.
Presentation Stinking stools/steatorrhoea; diarrhoea; abdominal pain; bloating; nau-
sea + vomiting; aphthous ulcers; angular stomatitis (p327, ﬁ g 8.5); weight; fatigue; 
weakness; osteomalacia; failure to thrive (children). ~30% less severe: may mimic IBS.
Diagnosis  Hb;  RCDW  (p325);  B12,  ferritin.  Antibodies:  anti-transglutaminase  is 
single preferred test (but is an IgA anti body—check IgA levels to exclude subclass deﬁ -
ciency). Where serology positive or high index of suspicion proceed to duodenal biopsy 
while on a gluten-containing diet: expect subtotal villous atrophy, intra-epithelial WBCS 
+ crypt hyperplasia. Where doubt persists, HLA DQ2 and DQ8 genotyping may help.
Treatment Lifelong gluten-free diet—patients become experts. Rice, maize, soya, 
potatoes,  and  sugar  are  OK.  Limited  consumption  of  oats  (≤50g/d)  may  be  toler-
ated in patients with mild disease.  Gluten-free biscuits, ﬂ our, bread, and pasta are 
prescribable. Monitor response by symptoms and repeat serology.9
Complications  Anaemia;  dermatitis  herpetiformis  (OHCS  p588);  osteopenia/os-
teoporosis;  hyposplenism  (off er  ‘ﬂ u  and  pneumococcal  vaccinations);  GI  T-cell 
lymphoma (rare; suspect if refractory symptoms or weight);  risk of malignancy 
(lymphoma, gastric, oesophageal, colorectal); neuropathies.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)

IBS denotes a mixed group of abdominal symptoms for which no organic cause can 
be found. Most are probably due to disorders of intestinal motility, enhanced visceral 
perception (the ‘brain–gut’ axis: see BOX ‘Managing IBS’), or microbial dysbiosis. Sev-
eral diagnostic criteria exist (see BOX ‘Deﬁ ning gastrointestinal dysfunction’ p261). 
 Prevalence 10–20%; age at onset: 40yrs; : ≥2:1.
Diagnosis Only diagnose IBS if recurrent abdominal pain (or discomfort) associated 
with at least 2 of: • relief by defecation • altered stool form • altered bowel frequen-
cy (constipation and diarrhoea may alternate). Other features: urgency; incomplete 
evacuation; abdominal bloating/distension; mucus PR; worsening of symptoms after 
food. Symptoms are chronic (>6 months), and often exacerbated by stress, men-
struation, or gastroenteritis (post-infectious IBS). Signs: Examination may be nor-
mal, but general abdominal tenderness is common. Insuffl  ation of air during lower 
GI endoscopy (not usually needed) may reproduce the pain. Think of other diagnoses 
if: Age >60yrs; history <6 months; anorexia; weight; waking at night with pain/diar-
rhoea; mouth ulcers; abnormal CRP, ESR. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   266

_OHCM_10e.indb   266

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

267

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Causes of gastrointestinal malabsorption
Common in the UK: Coeliac disease; chronic pancreatitis; Crohn’s disease.
Rarer:
  • Bile: primary biliary cholangitis; ileal resection; biliary obstruction; colestyramine.
  • Pancreatic insufﬁ ciency: pancreatic cancer; cystic ﬁ brosis.
  • Small  bowel  mucosa:  Whipple’s  disease  (p716);  radiation  enteritis;  tropical 
sprue;  small  bowel  resection;  brush  border  enzyme  deﬁ ciencies  (eg  lactase 
insuffi  ciency); drugs (metformin, neomycin, alcohol); amyloid (p370).

  • Bacterial overgrowth:20 spontaneous (esp. in elderly); in jejunal diverticula; post-
op blind loops. DM & PPI use are also risk factors. Try metronidazole 400mg/8h PO. 
Don’t confuse with aff erent loop syndrome (p622).

  • Infection: giardiasis; diphyllobothriasis (B12 malabsorption); strongyloidiasis.
  • Intestinal hurry: post-gastrectomy dumping; post-vagotomy; gastro jejunostomy.

Managing IBS  
Make a positive diagnosis (p266) and other diagnoses, so:
  • If the history is classic, FBC, ESR, CRP & coeliac serology (p266) are suffi  cient.
  • If 60yrs or any marker or organic disease (T°, blood PR, weight): colonoscopy.
  • Have a low threshold for referring if family history of ovarian or bowel cancer.
  • :  excluding  ovarian  cancer  requires  serum  CA-125  (OHCS  p281);  endo  metriosis 

(OHCS p288) often mimics IBS: consider if pain cyclical.

  • If IBS criteria not met, consider clinical context and decide upon: stool culture; 

B12/folate; TSH; faecal calprotectin (p262).

Refer if: 1 Diagnostic uncertainty (you or the patient!). 2 If changing symptoms 
in ‘known IBS’. 3 Refractory to management: stress or depression (seen in ≥50%) 
or refractory symptoms (here, NICE favours cognitive therapy, OHCS p390), chronic 
pain  overlap  syndromes (ﬁ bromyalgia + chronic  fatigue + chronic  pelvic  pain) or 
detrusor problems.
Treatment: Should focus on controlling symptoms, initially using lifestyle/dietary 
measures, then cognitive therapy (OHCS p390) or pharmacotherapy if required:
  • Constipation:  ensure  adequate  water  and  ﬁ bre  intake  and  promote  physical 
activity; (ﬁ bre intake can worsen ﬂ atul ence/bloating so avoid insoluble ﬁ bre, 
such  as  bran;  oats  are  better).  Simple  laxatives  (p260,  but  beware  lactulose 
which ferments and can aggravate bloating). If 2 of these fail, try prucalopride, 
linaclotide, or lubiprostone; or self-administered anal irrigation.

  • Diarrhoea:  avoid  sorbitol  sweeteners,  alcohol,  and  caff eine;  reduce  dietary 
ﬁ bre  content;  encourage  patients  to  identify  their  own  ‘trigger’  foods;  try  a 
bulking agent ± loperamide 2mg after each loose stool.

  • Colic/bloating:  oral  antispasmodics: mebeverine  135mg/8h or  hyoscine  butyl-
bromide 10mg/8h (over the counter). Combination probiotics in suffi  cient doses 
(eg  VSL#3®) may help ﬂ atulence or bloating. Diets low in fermentable, poorly 
absorbed saccharides and alcohols may provide beneﬁ t (the low FODMAP diet).
  • Psychological  symptoms/visceral  hypersensitivity:  emphasize  the  positive! 
You have excluded sinister pathology and over time, symptoms tend to improve. 
Consider cognitive behavioural therapy (OHCS p390), hypnosis, and tricyclics, eg 
amitriptyline 10–20mg at night (SE: drowsiness, dry mouth); explain that this is at 
a low dose for visceral pain (ie you are not prescribing the higher licensed dose 
for depression).

20  Bacterial overgrowth proximal to the colon causes diarrhoea, abdominal pain, and vitamin malabsorp-
tion. Causes: old age, autonomic neuropathy (eg diabetic), ileocaecal valve resection; PPI usage; amyloidosis. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   267

_OHCM_10e.indb   267

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

268

Nutritional disorders 

Always consider that more than one nutritional disorder is likely to be present 
(table 6.9).
Scurvy is due to lack of vitamin C.21 Is the patient poor, pregnant, or on an odd 
diet? Signs: 1 Listlessness, anorexia, cachexia (p35). 2 Gingivitis, loose teeth, and foul 
breath (halitosis). 3 Bleeding from gums, nose, hair follicles, or into joints, bladder, 
gut. 4 Muscle pain/weakness. 5 Oedema.  Diagnosis: No test is completely satisfac-
tory. WBC ascorbic acid.  : Dietary education; ascorbic acid ≥250mg/24h PO.
Beriberi There is heart failure with general oedema (wet beriberi) or neuropathy 
(dry  beriberi)  due  to  lack  of  vitamin  B1  (thiamine).  For  treatment  and  diagnostic 
tests, see Wernicke’s encephalopathy (p714).
Pellagra  = lack  of  nicotinic  acid.  Classical  triad:  diarrhoea,  dementia,  dermatitis 
(Casal’s necklace) ± neuropathy, depression, insomnia, tremor, rigidity, ataxia, ﬁ ts. 
It may occur in carcinoid syndrome and anti-TB drugs (isoniazid). It is endemic in 
China and Africa. : Education, electrolyte replacement, nicotinamide 100mg/4h.
Xerophthalmia This vitamin A deﬁ ciency syndrome is a big cause of blindness in the 
Tropics. Conjunctivae become dry and develop oval/triangular spots (Bitôt’s spots). 
Corneas become cloudy and soft. Give vitamin A (OHCS p460). Get special help if 
pregnant: vitamin A embryopathy must be avoided. Re-educate and monitor diet.
Table 6.9  Deﬁ ciency syndromes and the sites of nutrient absorption

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Vitamin/nutrient
AF
B 1 (thiamine)

Site of absorption
Small intestine
Small intestine

B2 (riboﬂ avin)
B6 (pyridoxine)

B12

Proximal small intestine
Small intestine
Terminal ileum

C
DF
EF
KF
Folic acid
Nicotinamide
Mineral
Calcium
Copper
Fluoride
Iodide
Iron
Magnesium
Phosphate
Selenium
Zinc

Proximal ileum
Jejunum as free vitamin
Small intestine
Small intestine
Jejunum
Jejunum

Duodenum + jejunum
Stomach + jejunum
Stomach
Small intestine
Duodenum + jejunum
Small intestine
Small intestine
Small intestine
Jejunum

Deﬁ ciency syndrome
Xerophthalmia
Beriberi; Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
(p714)
Angular stomatis; cheilitis (p246)
Polyneuropathy
Macrocytic anaemia (p332); neuropa-
thy; glossitis
Scurvy
Rickets (p684); osteomalacia (p684)
Haemolysis; neurological deﬁ cit
Bleeding disorders (p344)
Macrocytic anaemia (p332)
Pellagra

p676
Menkes’ kinky hair syndrome
Dental caries
Goitre; cretinism
Microcytic anaemia (p326)
p679
Osteoporosis; anorexia; weakness
Cardiomyopathy (p679)
Acrodermatitis enteropathica; poor 
wound healing (p679)

F = fat-soluble vitamin, thus deﬁ ciency is likely if there is fat malabsorption.

21  That oranges and lemons prevent ‘the scurvy’ was noted by the naval surgeon James Lind in 1753. In 
what may rank as the ﬁ rst ever clinical trial, he randomly divided 12 sailors with scurvy into 6 groups, 
given the same basic diet but each group received a unique dietary intervention. The 2 sailors receving 
oranges and lemons both made a good recovery, unlike the other 10.

_OHCM_10e.indb   268

_OHCM_10e.indb   268

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

269

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Food mountains, the pellagra paradox, and the sorrow that weeping 
cannot symbolize
‘The sweet smell is a great sorrow on the land. Men who can graft the trees and 
make the seed fertile and big can ﬁ nd no way to let the hungry people eat their 
produce … The works of the roots of the vines, of the trees, must be destroyed 
to keep up the price …

There is a crime here that goes beyond denunciation. There is a sorrow here 
that weeping cannot symbolize. There is a failure here that topples all our suc-
cess.  The  fertile  earth,  the  straight  tree  rows,  the  sturdy  trunks,  and  the  ripe 
fruit. And children dying of pellagra must die because a proﬁ t cannot be taken 
from  an  orange.  And  coroners  must  ﬁ ll  in  the  certiﬁ cates—died  of  malnutri-
tion—because the food must rot, must be forced to rot.

The  people  come  with  nets  to  ﬁ sh  for  potatoes  in  the  river,  and  the  guards 
hold them back; they come in rattling cars to get the dumped oranges, but the 
kerosene is sprayed. And they stand still and watch the potatoes ﬂ oat by, listen 
to the screaming pigs being killed in a ditch and covered with quicklime, watch 
the mountains of oranges slop down to a putrefying ooze; and in the eyes of the 
people there is a failure; and in the eyes of the hungry there is a growing wrath. 
In  the  souls  of  the  people  the  grapes  of  wrath  are  ﬁ lling  and  growing  heavy, 
growing heavy for the vintage.’ (J Steinbeck The Grapes of Wrath)

How  do  John  Steinbeck’s  grapes  grow  in  our  21st-century  soil?  Too  well;  a 
double  harvest,  it  turns  out,  as  not  only  is  much  of  the  world  starving,  amid 
plenty (for those who can pay) but also there is a new ‘sorrow in our land that 
weeping cannot symbolize’: pathological ‘voluntary’ self-starvation, again amid 
plenty, in pursuit of the body-beautiful according to images laid down by media 
gods. If gastroenterologists had one wish it might not be the end ing of all their 
diseases, but that humankind stand in a right relationship with Stein beck’s fer-
tile earth, his straight trees, his sturdy trunks, and his ripe fruit.

_OHCM_10e.indb   269

_OHCM_10e.indb   269

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

270

Chronic pancreatitis 

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Epigastric pain ‘bores’ through to the back, eg relieved by sitting forward or hot water 
bottles on epigastrium/back (look for erythema ab igne’s mottled dusky greyness); 
bloating; steatorrhoea; weight; brittle diabetes. Symptoms relapse and worsen.
Causes Alcohol; smoking; autoimmune; rarely: familial; cystic ﬁ brosis; haemochro-
matosis; pancreatic duct obstruction (stones/tumour); congenital (pancreas divisum).
Tests  Ultrasound ± CT:  pancreatic  calciﬁ cations  conﬁ rm  the  diagnosis,  MRCP;  AXR. 
Speckled calciﬁ cation; faecal elastase.
Treatment Drugs: Give analgesia (coeliac-plexus block may give brief relief); lipase, 
eg Creon®; fat-soluble vitamins. Insulin needs may be high or variable (beware hy-
poglycaemia). Diet: No alcohol; low fat may help. Medium-chain triglycerides (MCT 
oil) may be tried (no lipase needed for absorp tion, but diarrhoea may be worsened). 
Surgery: For unremitting pain; narcotic abuse (beware of this); weight: eg pancrea-
tectomy or pancreaticojejunostomy (a duct drainage procedure).
Complications  Pseudocyst;  diabetes;  biliary  obstruction;  local  arterial  aneurysm; 
splenic vein thrombosis; gastric varices; pancreatic carcinoma.

Carcinoma of the pancreas 

Epidemiology ≈3% of all malignancy; ~9000 deaths/yr (UK). UK incidence is rising. 
Typical  patient    >70yrs  old.  Risk  factors  Smoking,  alcohol,  carcinogens,  DM, 
chronic pancreatitis, waist circumference (ie adiposity), and possibly a high-fat and 
red or processed meat diet. Pathology Mostly ductal adenocarcinoma (met astasize 
early; present late). 60% arise in the pancreas head, 25% in the body, 15% tail. A few 
arise in the ampulla of Vater (ampullary tumour) or pancreatic islet cells (insulinoma, 
gastrinoma, glucagonomas, somatostatinomas (p223), VIPomas); both have a better 
prognosis. Genetics ~95% have mutations in the KRAS2 gene.
The patient Tumours in the head of the pancreas present with painless obstruc-
tive jaundice. 75% of tumours in the body and tail present with epigastric pain (ra-
diates to back and relieved by sitting forward). Either may cause anorexia, weight 
loss, diabetes, or acute pancreatitis. Rarer features: Thrombophlebitis migrans (eg 
an arm vein becomes swollen and red, then a leg vein); Ca2+; marantic endocardi-
tis;  portal  hypertension  (splenic  vein  thrombosis);  nephrosis  (renal  vein  metasta-
ses).  Signs:  Jaundice  +  palpable  gallbladder  (Courvoisier’s  ‘law’,  p272);  epigastric 
mass; hepatomegaly; splenomegaly; lymphadenopathy; ascites.
Tests Blood: Cholestatic jaundice. CA 19–9 (p531) is non-speciﬁ c, but helps assess 
prognosis. Imaging:  US or CT can show a pancreatic mass ± dilated biliary tree ± 
hepatic metastases. They can guide biopsy and help staging prior to surgery/stent 
insertion. ERCP/MRCP (p742) show biliary tree anatomy and may localize the site of 
obstruction. EUS (endoscopic sonography) is an emerging adjunct for diagnosis and 
staging. : Most ductal cancers present with metastatic disease; <20% are suitable 
for radical surgery. Surgery: Resection (pancreato duodenectomy: Whip  ple’s, p271, 
ﬁ g 6.23) is a major undertaking best considered only where no distant metastases 
and where vascular invasion is still at a minimum. Post-op morbidity is high (mortal-
ity <5%); non-curative resection confers no survival beneﬁ t. Laparoscopic excision: 
Tail lesions are easiest. Post-op  chemotherapy: Delays disease progression. Pal-
liation of jaundice: Endoscopic or percutaneous stent insertion may help jaundice 
and anorexia. Rarely, palliative bypass surgery is done for duodenal obstruction or 
unsuccessful ERCP. Pain: Disabling pain may need big doses of opiates (p575), or radi-
otherapy. Coeliac plexus inﬁ ltration with alcohol may be done at the time of surgery, 
or percutaneously. Referral to a palliative care team is essential.
Prognosis Often dismal. Mean survival <6 months. 5yr survival: 3%. Overall 5yr sur-
vival after Whipple’s procedure 5–14%. Prognosis is better if: tumour <3cm; no nodes 
involved; Ωve resection margins at surgery; ampullary or islet cell tumours.

_OHCM_10e.indb   270

_OHCM_10e.indb   270

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

271

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Carcinoid tumours

This is a specialized area! A diverse group of tumours of enterochromaffi  n cell (neu-
ral crest) origin, by deﬁ nition capable of producing  5HT. Common sites: appendix 
(45%), ileum (30%), or rectum (20%).22 They also occur elsewhere in the  GI tract, 
ovary, testis, and bronchi. 80% of tumours >2cm across will metastasize (ie consider 
all  as  malignant).  Symptoms  and  signs  Initially  few.  GI  tumours  can  cause  ap-
pendicitis, intussusception, or obstruction. Hepatic metastases may cause RUQ pain. 
Tumours may secrete bradykinin, tachykinin, substance P, VIP, gastrin, insulin, gluca-
gon, ACTH ( Cushing’s syndrome), parathyroid, and thyroid hormones. 10% are part 
of MEN-1 syndrome (p223); 10% occur with other neuroendocrine tumours.
Carcinoid syndrome Occurs in ~5% and implies hepatic involvement.
Symptoms and signs: Bronchoconstriction; paroxysmal ﬂ ushing especially in upper 
body  (±  migrating  weals);  diarrhoea;  CCF  (tricuspid  incompetence  and  pulmonary 
stenosis from 5HT–induced ﬁ brosis). Carcinoid crisis: See BOX ‘Carcinoid crisis’.
Tests 24h urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA, a 5HT metabolite; levels change 
with drugs and diet: discuss with lab). CXR + chest/pelvis MRI/CT help locate primary 
tumours. Plasma chromogranin A (reﬂ ects tumour mass); 111Indium octreotide scin-
tigraphy  (octreoscan)  and  positron  emission  tomography  (p739)  also  have  a  role. 
Echocardiography and BNP (p137) can be used to investigate carcinoid heart disease. 
Treatment  Carcinoid  syndrome:  Octreotide  (somatostatin  analogue)  blocks 
release  of  tumour  mediators  and  counters  peripheral  eff ects.  Long-acting 
alternative:  lanreotide.  Loperamide  for  diarrhoea. Tumour  therapy:  Resection  is 
the only cure for carcinoid tumours so it is vital to ﬁ nd the primary site. At surgery, 
tumours  are  an  intense  yellow.  Procedures  depend  on  site,  eg  rectal  carcinoid 
tumours  <1cm  can  be  resected  endoscopically.  Debulking  (eg  enucleating), 
embolization,  or  radiofrequency  ablation  of  hepatic  metastases  can   symptoms. 
Give octreotide cover to avoid precipitating a massive carcinoid crisis.
Median survival 5–8yrs (~3yrs if metastases are present, but may be up to 20yrs; 
so beware of giving up too easily, even in metastatic disease).

Carcinoid crisis
When a tumour outgrows its blood supply or is handled too much during sur-
gery,  mediators  ﬂ ood  out.  There  is  life-threatening  vasodilation,  hypotension, 
tachycardia,  bronchoconstriction,  and  hyperglycaemia.  It  is  treated  with  high-
dose octreotide, supportive measures, and careful management of ﬂ uid balance 
(ie a central line is needed—see p775 for insertion technique).

Whipple’s procedure
(a) Areas of reﬂ ection of diff erent parts  

(b) Post-operation

Fig 6.23  Whipple’s procedure may be used for removing masses in the head of the pancreas—
typically from pancreatic carcinoma or, rarely, a carcinoid tumour. 10

22  Some are never clinically detected: 1 in 300 autopsies have a small bowel carcinoid tumour.

_OHCM_10e.indb   271

_OHCM_10e.indb   271

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

272

Jaundice

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Jaundice refers to yellowing of skin, sclerae, and mucosae from plasma bilirubin 
(visible at 60μmol/L ﬁ g 6.24). Jaundice is classiﬁ ed by the site of the problem (pre-
hepatic, hepatocellular, or cholestatic/ob structive) or by the type of circulating bili-
rubin (conjugated or unconj ugated, ﬁ g 6.25).
Unconjugated hyperbili rubinaemia As unconjugated bilirubin is water-insoluble, 
it does not enter urine, resulting in unconjugated hyperbili rubinaemia.
Overproduction: Haemolysis (p338, eg malaria/DIC, etc); ineff ective erythropoiesis.
Impaired hepatic uptake: Drugs (paracetamol, rifampicin), ischaemic hepatitis.
Impaired conjugation: Eponymous syndromes: Gilbert’s, p700; Crigler–Najjar, p696.
Physiological neonatal jaundice: Caused by a combination of the above, OHCS p115.
Conjugated  hyperbili rubinaemia  As  conjugated  bilirubin  is  water-soluble,  it  is 
excreted in urine, making it dark. Less conjugated bilirubin enters the gut and the 
faeces become pale. When severe, it can be associated with an intractable pruri-
tus which is best treated by relief of the obstruction.
Hepatocellular dysfunction: There is hepatocyte damage, usually with some chole-
stasis.  Causes:  Viruses:  hepatitis  (p278),  CMV  (p405),  EBV  (p405);  drugs  (see  ta-
ble 6.10); alcohol; cirrhosis (see  BOX ‘Causes of jaundice’); liver metastases/abscess; 
haemo chromatosis; autoimmune hepatitis (AIH); septicaemia; leptospirosis; syphilis; 
1-anti trypsin deﬁ ciency (p290); Budd–Chiari (p696); Wilson’s disease (p285); failure 
to  excrete  conjugated  bilirubin  (Dubin–Johnson  &  Rotor  syndromes,  p698,  p710); 
right heart failure; toxins, eg carbon tetrachloride; fungi (ﬁ g 6.26).
Impaired  hepatic  excretion  (cholestasis):  Primary  biliary  cholangitis;  primary 
sclerosing  cholangitis;  drugs  (see  table  6.10);  common  bile  duct  gallstones;  pan-
creatic cancer; compression of the bile duct, eg lymph nodes at the porta hepatis; 
cholangiocarcinoma;  choledochal  cyst;  Caroli’s  disease;23  Mirrizi’s  syndrome  (ob-
structive jaundice from common bile duct compression by a gallstone impacted in 
the cystic duct, often associated with cholangitis).
The  patient  Ask:  About  blood  transfusions,  IV  drug  use, body  piercing, tattoos, 
sexual activity, travel abroad, jaundiced contacts, family history, alcohol use, and all 
medications (eg old drug charts; GP records). Examine: For signs of chronic liver dis-
ease (p276), hepatic encephalopathy (p275), lymph adenopathy, hepatomegaly, spleno-
megaly, ascites, and a palpable gallbladder (if seen with painless jaundice the cause 
is not gallstones—Courvoisier’s ‘law’).24 Pale stools + dark urine ≈ cholestatic jaundice.
Tests  See  p276  for  screening  tests  in  suspected  liver  disease. Urine:  Bilirubin  is 
absent in pre-hepatic causes; in obstructive jaundice, urobilinogen is absent. Hae-
matology:  FBC,  clotting,  ﬁ lm,  reticulocyte  count,  Coombs’  test  and  haptoglobins 
for haemolysis (p336), malaria parasites (eg if unconjugated bilirubin/fever); Paul 
Bunnell  (EBV).  Chemistry:  U&E,  LFT,  -GT,  total  protein,  albumin.25 Paracetamol  lev-
els.  Microbiology:  Blood  and  other  cultures;  hepatitis  serology.  Ultrasound:  Are 
the  bile  ducts  dilated?  Are  there  gallstones,  hepatic  metastases,  or  a  pancreatic 
mass? ERCP: (See p742.) If bile ducts are dilated and LFT not improving. MRCP: (See 
p742.) Or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) if conventional ultrasound shows gallstones 
but  no  deﬁ nite  com mon  bile  duct  stones.  Liver  biopsy:  (See  p248.)  If  bile  ducts 
are normal. Consider abdominal CT/MRI if abdominal malignancy is suspected.
What to do? Treat the cause promptly. Ensure adequate hydration; broad-spec-
trum antibiotics if obstruction. Monitor for ascites, encephalopathy; call a hepatologist.

23  Multiple  segmental  cystic  or  saccular  dilatations  of  intrahepatic  bile  ducts  with  congenital  hepatic 
ﬁ brosis. It may present in 20yr-olds, with portal hypertension ± recurrent cholangitis/cholelithiasis.
24  Pancreatic or gallbladder cancer is more likely, as stones lead to a ﬁ brotic, unexpandable gallbladder.
25  Albumin  &  INR  are  the  best  indicators  of  hepatic  synthetic  function.  Transaminases  (ALT,  AST)  indi-
cate hepatocyte damage. ALP suggests obstructive jaundice, but also occurs in hepatocellular jaundice, 
malignant inﬁ ltration, pregnancy (placental isoenzyme), Paget’s disease, and childhood (bone isoenzyme).

_OHCM_10e.indb   272

_OHCM_10e.indb   272

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Fig 6.24  It’s easy to miss mild jaundice, especially under ﬂ uo-
rescent light, so take your patient to the window, and as you 
both gaze at the sky, use the opportunity to broaden the hori-
zons of your enquiries ... where have you been ... where are you 
going ...who are you with ... what are you taking ...? In the gaps, 
your patient may tell you the diagnosis—alcohol or drug abuse, 
sexual infections/hepatitis, or worries about the side-eff ects of 
their TB or HIV medication or a spreading cancer ‘from this lump 
here which I haven’t told anyone about yet’. 
Reproduced from 
Roper, Clinical Skills, 2014, with permission from Oxford University Press.

The pathway of bilirubin metabolism
In the liver, bilirubin is conjugated with glucuronic acid by hepatocytes, making 
it water-soluble. Conjugated bilirubin is secreted in bile and passes into the gut. 
Some is taken up again by the liver (via the enterohepatic circulation) and the rest 
is converted to urobilinogen by gut bacteria. Urobilinogen is either reabsorbed and 
excreted by the kidneys, or converted to stercobilin, which colours faeces brown.

273

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig 6.25  Bilirubin is formed by the 
breakdown  of  haemoglobin  in  a 
3-step process: hepatic uptake, con-
jugation, and excretion.

Causes of jaundice in a previously stable patient with cirrhosis
• Sepsis (esp. UTI, pneumonia, or peritonitis) 
• Malignancy: eg hepatocellular carcinoma 
Signs of decompensation: Jaundice; ascites; UGI bleed; encephalopathy.

• Alcohol; drugs (table 6.10)
• GI bleeding.

Table 6.10  Examples of drug-induced jaundice
Haemolysis
Hepatitis

 • Antimalarials (eg dapsone)
 • Paracetamol overdose (p844)
 • Isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide
 • Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
 • Flucloxacillin (may be weeks after )
 • Fusidic acid, co-amoxiclav, nitrofurantoin
 • Steroids (anabolic; the Pill)

Cholestasis

 • Sodium valproate
 • Halothane
 • Statins
 • Sulfonylureas
 • Prochlorperazine
 • Chlorpromazine

Fig  6.26  Amanita  phalloides  (Latin  for  ‘phallic  toadstool’; 
also known as the ‘death cap’) is a lethal cause of jaundice. It 
is the most toxic mushroom known. After in gestion (its benign 
appearance  is  confusing),  ama toxins  induce  hepatic  necro sis 
leaving few options other than transplantation.

©Ian Her riott. NB: don’t use this image for identiﬁ cation!

_OHCM_10e.indb   273

_OHCM_10e.indb   273

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

274

Liver failure

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Deﬁ nitions Liver failure may be recognized by the development of coagulopathy 
(INR>1.5) and encephalopathy. This may occur suddenly in the previously healthy liver 
=  acute  liver  failure  (hyperacute = onset ≤ 7d;  acute = 8–21d;  subacute = 4–26wks.) 
More often it occurs on a background of cirrhosis = chronic liver failure. Fulminant 
hepatic failure is a clinical syndrome resulting from massive necrosis of liver cells 
leading to severe impairment of liver function.
Causes Infections: Viral hepatitis (esp. B, C, CMV), yellow fever, leptospirosis. Drugs: 
Paracetamol overdose, halothane, isoniazid. Toxins: Amanita phalloides mushroom 
(ﬁ g  6.26),  carbon  tetrachloride.  Vascular:  Budd–Chiari  syn.  (p696),  veno-occlusive 
disease.  Others:  Alcohol,  fatty  liver  disease,  primary  biliary  cholangitis,  primary 
sclerosing cholangitis, haemochromatosis, autoimmune hepatitis,  1-antitrypsin de-
ﬁ ciency, Wilson’s disease, fatty liver of pregnancy (OHCS p25), malignancy.
Signs Jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy (see BOX ‘Hepatic encephalopathy’), fetor 
hepaticus (smells like pear drops), asterixis/ﬂ ap (p50), constructional apraxia (can-
not copy a 5-pointed star?). Signs of chronic liver disease (p276) suggest acute-on-
chronic hepatic failure.
Tests Blood: FBC (?infection,26 ?GI bleed), U&E,27 LFT, clotting (PT/INR), glucose, para-
cetamol level, hepatitis, CMV and EBV serology, ferritin, 1-antitrypsin, caeruloplasmin, 
autoantibodies  (p284).  Microbiology:  Blood  culture;  urine  culture;  ascitic  tap  for 
MC&S of ascites—neutrophils >250/mm3 indicates spontaneous bact erial peritonitis 
(p276). Radiology: CXR; abdominal ultrasound; Doppler ﬂ ow studies of the portal vein 
(and hepatic vein in suspected Budd–Chiari syndrome, p696). Neuro physiology: EEG, 
evoked potentials (and neuroimaging) have a limited role.
Management Beware sepsis, hypoglycaemia, GI bleeds/varices, & encephalopathy:
  • Nurse with a 20° head-up tilt in ITU. Protect the airway with intubation and in-

sert an NG tube to avoid aspiration and remove any blood from stomach.

  • Insert urinary and central venous catheters to help assess ﬂ uid status.
  • Monitor T°, respirations, pulse, BP, pupils, urine output hourly. Daily weights.
  • Check FBC, U&E, LFT, and INR daily.
  • 10% glucose IV, 1L/12h to avoid hypoglycaemia. Do blood glucose every 1–4h.
  • Treat the cause, if known (eg GI bleeds, sepsis, paracetamol poisoning, p844).
  • If  malnourished,  get  dietary  help:  good  nutrition  can  decrease  mortality. Give 

thiamine and folate supplements (p714).

  • Treat seizures with phenytoin (p826). 11
  • Haemoﬁ ltration or haemodialysis, if renal failure develops (BOX ‘What is hepato-

renal syndrome?’).

  • Try to avoid sedatives and other drugs with hepatic metabolism (BOX ‘Prescrib-

ing in liver failure’ and BNF).

  • Consider PPI as prophylaxis against stress ulceration, eg omeprazole 40mg/d IV/PO.
  • Liaise early with nearest transplant centre regarding appropriateness.
Treat complications Cerebral oedema: On ITU: 20% mannitol IV; hyperventilate.
Ascites: Restrict ﬂ uid, low-salt diet, weigh daily, diuretics (p276).
Bleeding: Vitamin K 10mg/d IV for 3d, platelets, FFP + blood as needed ± endoscopy.
Blind  of infection: Ceftriaxone 1–2g/24h IV, not gentamicin (risk of renal failure).
Blood glucose: If 2mmol/L or symptomatic,  50mL of 50% glucose IV; check often.
Encephalopathy:  Avoid  sedatives;  20°  head-up  tilt  in  ITU;  correct  electrolytes; 
lactulose 30–50mL/8h (aim for 2–4 soft stools/d) is catabolized by bacterial ﬂ ora 
+ ; 
to short-chain fatty acids which colonic pH and trap NH3 in the colon as NH4
Rifaximin 550mg/12h is a non-absorbable oral antibiotic that  numbers of nitrogen-
forming gut bacteria.
Worse prognosis if Grade III–IV encephalopathy, age >40yrs, albumin <30g/L, INR, 
drug-induced liver failure, late-onset hepatic failure worse than fulminant failure. 

26  Neutrophilic leucocytosis need not mean a secondary infection: alcoholic hepatitis may be the cause.
27  Urea is synthesized in the liver, so is a poor test of renal function in liver failure; use creatinine instead.

_OHCM_10e.indb   274

_OHCM_10e.indb   274

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Prescribing in liver failure
Avoid drugs that constipate (risk of encephalopathy), oral hypoglycaemics, and 
saline-containing IVIs. Warfarin eff ects are enhanced. Hepatotoxic drugs include 
paracetamol,  methotrexate,  isoniazid,  azathioprine,  phenothiazines,  oestrogen, 
6-mercaptopurine, salicylates, tetracycline, mitomycin.

275

Hepatic encephalopathy: letting loose some false neurotransmitters
As  the  liver  fails,  nitrogenous  waste  (as  ammonia)  builds  up  in  the  circulation 
and  passes  to  the  brain,  where  astrocytes  clear  it  (by  processes  involving  the 
conversion of glutamate to glutamine). This excess glutamine causes an osmotic 
imbalance and a shift of ﬂ uid into these cells—hence cerebral oedema. Grading:
I  Altered mood/behaviour; sleep disturbance (eg reversed sleep pattern); dysp-

raxia (‘Please copy this 5-pointed star’); poor arithmetic. No liver ﬂ ap.

II  Increasing drowsiness, confusion, slurred speech ± liver ﬂ ap, inappropriate 

behaviour/personality change (ask the family—don’t be too tactful).

III Incoherent; restless; liver ﬂ ap; stupor.
IV  Coma.
What else could be clouding consciousness? Hypoglycaemia; sepsis; trauma; postictal.

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

What is hepatorenal syndrome (HRS)?
Cirrhosis + ascites + renal  failure ≈ HRS—if  other  causes  of  renal  impairment 
have been excluded. Abnormal haemodynamics causes splanchnic and systemic 
vaso dilation, but renal vasoconstriction. Bacterial translocation, cytokines, and 
mesenteric angiogenesis cause splanchnic vasodilation, and altered renal auto-
regulation is involved in the renal vasoconstriction.
Types of HRS: HRS 1 is a rapidly progressive deterioration in circulatory and renal 
function (median survival <2wks), often triggered by other deteriorating patholo-
gies. Terlipressin resists hypovolaemia. Haemodialysis may be needed. HRS 2 is a 
more steady deterioration (survival ~6 months). Transjugular intrahepatic porto-
systemic stent shunting may be required (TIPS, p257).
Other factors in cirrhosis may contribute to poor renal function (p277).
Transplants: Liver transplant may be required. After >8–12wks of pre-transplant 
dialysis, some may be considered for combined liver–kidney transplantation. 

King’s College Hospital criteria in acute liver failure
Paracetamol-induced liver failure
  • Arterial pH <7.3 24h after ingestion.
Or all of the following:
  • Prothrombin time (PT) >100s
  • Creatinine >300μmol/L
  • Grade III or IV encephalopathy.

Non-paracetamol liver failure
  • PT >100s.
Or 3 out of 5 of the following:
1      Drug-induced liver failure
2      Age <10 or >40yrs old
3      >1wk from 1st jaundice to

encephalopathy

4      PT >50s
5      Bilirubin ≥300μmol/L.

Fulﬁ lling these criteria predicts poor outcome in acute liver failure and should 
prompt consideration for transplantation (p277). 

Reproduced from O'Grady J et al. ‘Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure.’ 
Gastroenterology, 97(2):439–45, 1989 with permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   275

_OHCM_10e.indb   275

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

276

Cirrhosis

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Cirrhosis (Greek kirrhos = yellow) implies irreversible liver damage. Histologically, there 
is loss of normal hepatic architecture with bridging ﬁ brosis and nodular regeneration.
Causes  Most  often  chronic  alcohol  abuse,  HBV,  or  HCV  infection.  Others:  see  BOX 
‘Causes of cirrhosis’.
Signs  Leuconychia:  white  nails  with 
lunulae  undemarcated,  from  hypo-
albuminaemia;  Terry’s  nails—white  proximally  but  distal  ⅓  reddened  by  telangi-
ectasias;  clubbing;  palmar  erythema;  hyperdynamic  cir culation;  Dupuytren’s 
contracture;  spider  naevi  (ﬁ g  6.27);  xanthelasma; gynaecomastia;  atrophic  testes; 
loss  of  body  hair;  parotid  enlargement  (alcohol);  hepatomegaly,  or  small  liver  in 
late disease; ascites; splenomegaly.
Complications  Hepatic  failure:  Coagulopathy  (failure  of  hepatic  synthesis  of 
clotting  factors);  encephalopathy  (p259);  hypoalbuminaemia  (oedema);  sepsis 
(pneumonia; septicaemia); spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP); hypoglycaemia. 
Portal hypertension: Ascites (ﬁ g 6.28); splenomeg aly; portosystemic shunt includ-
ing  oesophageal  varices  (±  life-threatening  upper  GI  bleed)  and  caput  medusae 
(enlarged superﬁ cial periumbilical veins). HCC:  risk.
Tests Blood: LFT:  or bilirubin, AST, ALT, ALP, GT. Later, with loss of synthetic 
function,  look  for  albumin  ±  PT/INR.  WCC  &  plate l ets  indicate  hypersplenism. 
Find  the  cause:  ferritin,  iron/total  iron-binding  capacity  (p288);  hepatitis  serol-
ogy  (p278);  immunoglobulins  (p290);  autoantibodies  (ANA,  AMA,  SMA,  p553);  -feto
protein  (p286);  caeruloplasmin  in  patients  <40yrs  old  (p285);  1-antitrypsin  (p290). 
Liver ultrasound + duplex: May show a small liver or hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
focal liver lesion(s), hepatic vein thrombus, reversed ﬂ ow in the portal vein, or as-
cites. MRI: Caudate lobe size, smaller islands of regenerating nodules, and the pres-
ence  of  the  right  posterior  hepatic  notch  are  more  frequent  in  alcoholic  cirrhosis 
than in virus-induced cirrhosis. Ascitic tap: Should be performed and ﬂ uid sent for 
urgent MC&S—neutrophils >250/mm3 indicates spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (see 
later in topic for treatment). Liver biopsy: (See p248.) Conﬁ rms the clinical diagnosis.
Management  General:  Good  nutrition  is  vital.  Alcohol  abstinence  (p280).  Avoid 
NSAIDS,  sedatives,  and  opiates.  Colestyramine  helps  pruritus  (4g/12h  PO,  1h  after 
other  drugs).  Consider  ultrasound  ±  -fetoprotein  every  6  months  to  screen  for 
HCC (p286) in those where this information will change management. Speciﬁ c: For 
hepatitis-induced  cirrhosis  see  p278.  High-dose  ursodeoxycholic  acid  in  PBC (p282) 
may  improve  LFT  and  improve  transplant-free  survival.  Penicillamine  for  Wilson’s 
disease  (p285).  Ascites:  Fluid  restriction  (<1.5L/d),  low-salt  diet  (40–100mmol/d). 
Give  spironolactone  100mg/24h  PO;  dose  as  tolerated  (max  400mg/24h)—it  coun-
ters deranged renin–angiotensin–aldosterone (RAA) axis. Chart daily weight and aim 
for weight loss of  ≤½kg/d. If response is poor,  add furosemide ≤120mg/24h  PO; do 
U&E (watch Na+) often. Therapeutic paracentesis with concomitant albumin infusion 
(6–8g/L  ﬂ uid  removed)  may  be  required.  Spontaneous  bacterial  peritonitis  (SBP): 
Must  be  considered  in  any  patient  with  ascites  who  deteriorates  suddenly  (may 
be asymptomatic). Common organisms are E. coli, Klebsiella, and streptococci. : eg 
piperacillin with tazobactam 4.5g/8h for 5d or until sensitivities known. Give prophy-
laxis for high-risk patients (albumin, PT/INR, low ascitic albumin) or those who have 
had a previous episode: eg ciproﬂ oxacin 500mg PO daily. Encephalopathy: Recurrent 
episodes  may  be  reduced  in  frequency  with  prophylactic  lactulose  and  rifaximin 
(p274). Renal failure: hepatic clearance of immune complexes leads to trapping in 
kidneys ( IgA nephropathy ± hepatic glomerulosclerosis). See also p275 for hepato-
renal syndrome.
Prognosis Overall 5yr survival is ~50%. Poor prognostic indicators: encephalopa-
thy; serum Na+ <110mmol/L; serum albumin <25g/L; INR.
Liver transplantation is the only deﬁ nitive treatment for cirrhosis (p277). Acute 
indications: Acute liver failure meeting King’s College criteria (see BOX ‘King’s Col-
lege Hospital criteria in acute liver failure’ p275) Chronic indications: Advanced cir-
rhosis of any cause; hepatocellular cancer (1 nodule <5cm or ≤5 nodules <3cm). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   276

_OHCM_10e.indb   276

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

277

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig 6.27  Spider naevi: a central arteriole, from 
which numerous vessels radiate (like the legs of 
a spider). These ﬁ ll from the centre unlike tel-
angiectasias that ﬁ ll from the edge. They occur 
most commonly in skin drained by the superior 
vena cava. ≤5 are normal (especially in ). Caus-
es include liver disease, OCP, and pregnancy (ie 
changes in oestrogen metabolism).

Fig 6.28  Gross ascites. Note the umbilical her-
nia (p613), gynaecomastia, and veins visible on 
the anterior abdominal wall.

Causes of cirrhosis
  • Chronic alcohol use
  • Chronic HBV or HCV infection28
  • Genetic disorders: haemochromatosis
(p288);  1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency (p290); 
Wilson’s disease (p285)

  • Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
  • Autoimmunity: primary biliary cholangi-
tis (p282); primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(p282); autoimmune hepatitis (p284)

  • Drugs:  eg  amiodarone,  methyldopa, 

  • Hepatic vein events (Budd–Chiari, p696)

methotrexate.

Is cirrhosis becoming decompensated? Prepare to make an arrest...
Cirrhosis may lie in wait for years before committing one of its three great crimes 
against  the  person:  jaundice,  ascites,  or  encephalopathy.  There  are  almost  always 
accomplices  who,  if  arrested  now,  may  stop  a  killing  from  unfolding.  These  usual 
suspects are: dehydration constipation covert alcohol use infection (eg spon-
taneous peritonitis, see earlier in topic) opiate over-use—or an occult GI bleed. If 
all have alibis, think of portal vein thrombosis, and call in the Chief Inspector.

Liver transplantation
The ﬁ rst liver transplant was in Denver, USA, in 1963. Now 800–1000 are performed 
each year in the UK (indications see p284). The limiting step for the procedure is 
often the waiting-list for a donor organ, which may be cadaveric (heart-beating or 
non-heart-beating) or from live donors (right lobe). Contraindications include ex-
trahepatic malignancy; severe cardiorespiratory disease; systemic sepsis; expected 
non-compliance with drug therapy; ongoing alcohol consumption (in those with 
alcohol-related liver disease). Refer earlier rather than later, eg when ascites is 
refractory or after a 1st episode of bacterial peritonitis. Prioritization in the UK is 
based upon the UKELD (UK end-stage liver disease) score, calculated from serum Na+, 
creatinine, bilirubin, and INR.29
Post-op: 12–48h on ITU, with enteral feeding starting as soon as possible and close 
monitoring  of  LFT.  Immunosuppression  examples:  tacrolimus  ±  mycophenolate 
mofetil (or aza thioprine) + prednisolone. Hyper acute rejection is a result of ABO 
incompatibility. Acute rejection (T-cell mediated, at 5–10d): the patient feels unwell 
with pyrexia and tender hepatomegaly—often managed by altering the immuno-
suppressives. Other complications: sepsis (esp. Gram Ωve and CMV), hepatic artery 
thrombosis,  chronic  rejection  (at  6–9  months), disease  recurrence,  and,  rarely, 
graft-versus-host disease. Average patient survival at 1yr is ~80% (5yr survival 
60–90%; depends on the pre-op disease).

28  Clues as to which patients with chronic HCV will get cirrhosis: platelet count ≤140 x 109/L, globulin/albu-
min ratio ≥1, and AST/ALT ratio ≥1—100% +ve predictive value but lower sensitivity (~30%).
29  Online calculators available, eg at www.odt.nhs.uk

_OHCM_10e.indb   277

_OHCM_10e.indb   277

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

278

Viral hepatitis

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Hepatitis A RNA virus. Spread: Faecal–oral or shellﬁ sh. Endemic in Africa and S Amer-
ica, so a problem for travellers. Most infections are in childhood. Incubation: 2–6wks.
Symp toms: Fever, malaise, anorexia, nausea, arthralgia—then: jaundice (rare in chil-
dren),  hepatosplenomegaly,  and  adenopathy. Tests:  AST  and ALT  rise  22–40d  after 
exposure (ALT may be >1000IU/L), returning to normal over 5–20wks. IgM rises from 
day 25 and means recent infection. IgG is detectable for life.
: Supportive. Avoid alcohol. Rarely, interferon alfa for fulminant hepatitis.
Active immunization: With inactivated viral protein. 1 IM dose gives immunity for 
1yr (20yrs if further booster is given at 6–12 months).
Prognosis: Usually self-limiting. Fulminant hepatitis is rare. Chronicity doesn’t occur.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV, a DNA virus.) Spread: Blood products, IV drug abusers (IVDU), 
sexual,  direct  contact.  Deaths:  1  million/yr.  Risk  groups:  IV  drug  users  and  their 
sexual partners/carers; health workers; haemophiliacs; men who have sex with men; 
haemodialysis (and chronic renal failure); sexually promiscuous; foster carers; close 
family members of a carrier or case; staff  or residents of institutions/prisons; babies 
of HBSAg +ve mothers; adopted child from endemic area.
Endemic in: Far East, Africa, Mediterranean. Incubation: 1–6 months.
Signs: Resemble hepatitis A but arthralgia and urticaria are commoner.
Tests:  HBSAg (surface antigen) is present 1–6 months after exposure.  HBeAg (e an-
tigen) is  present  for  1½–3  months  after  acute  illness  and  implies  high  infectivity. 
HBSAg persisting for >6 months deﬁ nes carrier status and occurs in 5–10% of infec-
tions;  biopsy  may  be  indicated  unless  ALT  and  HBV  DNA  <2000iu/mL.  Antibodies 
to HBCAg (anti-HBc) imply past infection; antibodies to HBSAg (anti-HBs) alone imply 
vaccination. HBV PCR allows monitoring of response to therapy. See ﬁ g 6.29 and ta-
ble 6.11. Vaccination: See p287. Passive immunization (speciﬁ c anti-HBV immuno-
globulin) may be given to non-immune contacts after high-risk exposure.
Complications: Fulminant hepatic failure, cirrhosis, HCC, cholangiocarcinoma, cryo-
globulinaemia, membranous nephropathy, polyarteritis nodosa (p556).
: Avoid alcohol. Immunize sexual contacts. Refer all with chronic liver inﬂ amma-
tion (eg ALT 30IU/L), cirrhosis, or HBV DNA >2000IU/mL for antivirals (choice is 48 
wks pegylated (PEG) interferon alfa-2a vs long-term but better tolerated nucleos(t)
ide analogues, eg tenofovir, entecavir). The aim is to clear HBSAg and prevent cir-
rhosis and HCC (risk is  if HBSAg and HBeAg +ve).
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA ﬂ avivirus. Spread: Blood: transfusion, IV drug abuse, 
sexual  contact.  UK  prevalence:  >200 000.  Early  infection  is  often  mild/asympto-
matic. ~85% develop silent chronic infection; ~25% get cirrhosis in 20yrs—of these, 
4% get hepatocellular cancer (HCC)/yr. Risk factors for progression: Male, older, 
higher  viral  load,  use  of  alcohol,  HIV,  HBV.  Tests:  LFT  (AST : ALT  <1 : 1  until  cirrhosis 
develops, p276), anti-HCV anti bodies conﬁ rms exposure;  HCV-PCR conﬁ rms ongoing 
infection/chronicity; liver biopsy or non-invasive elastography if HCV-PCR +ve to as-
sess liver damage and need for treatment. Determine HCV genotype (1–6).
: BOX; quit alcohol. Other complications: Glomerulonephritis; cryoglobulin aemia; 
thyroiditis; autoimmune hepatitis; PAN; polymyositis; porphyria cutanea tarda.
Hepatitis D virus (HDV) Incomplete RNA virus (needs HBV for its assembly). HBV vac-
cination  prevents  HDV  infection.  5%  of  HBV  carriers  have  HDV  co-infection.  It  may 
cause acute liver failure/cirrhosis. Tests: Anti-HDV antibody (only ask for it if HBsAg 
+ve). : As interferon alfa has limited success, liver transplantation may be needed.
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) RNA virus. Similar to HAV; common in Indochina (commoner in 
older men and also commoner than hepatitis A in UK); mortal  ity is high in pregnancy. 
It is associated with pigs. Epidemics occur (eg Africa). Vaccine is available in China 
(not Europe). : Serology. : Nil speciﬁ c.
Other infective causes of hepatitis EBV; CMV; leptospirosis; malaria; Q fever; syph-
ilis; yellow fever.

_OHCM_10e.indb   278

_OHCM_10e.indb   278

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 6.11  Serological markers of HBV infection

LFT

HBsAg

HBeAg
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBc IgM 
Anti-HBc IgG

Incubation Acute

+
+

+
+

Carrier

+
+/Ω

Recovery
Normal

Vaccinated
Normal

+
+

+/Ω
+/Ω
+

+

+

+

279

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

weeks

Fig 6.29  Viral events in hepatitis B in relation to AST peak. IF=immunoﬂ uorescence; Ag=anti gen; 
HBS=hep. B surface; HBC=hep. B core; HBe=hep. B e antigen; DNAP=DNA polymerase.

The virologists’ triumph: curing HCV
Since the original isolation of HCV in the late 1980s, riding the wave of the AIDS 
scare, less than three decades have elapsed. In this time, the comparatively sim-
ple genome of HCV has proven far easier than HIV to combat and the treatment 
of  HCV  has  undergone  nothing  less  than  a  revolution  to  the  point  where  many 
common genotypes are considered curable.

All patients with sustained detectable HCV should be considered for treatment. 
Options are evolving rapidly, but centre on the use of inhibitors of non-structural 
viral proteins (eg ledipasvir+sofosbuvir) which are much better tolerated than the 
previous  mainstay  of  treatment,  pegylated  interferon.  Interferon-free  regimens 
therefore eliminate major barriers to compliance including treatment duration and 
SES, as well as achieving superior results: contemporary antiviral regimens can now 
realistically achieve the complete absence of PCR detectable virus in the blood 6 
months post-treatment in almost 100% of genotype 1 patients, including patients 
with established cirrhosis. Ribavirin, a nucleoside analogue, can also increasingly 
be avoided in genotype 1, though it remains a useful treatment for the harder to 
treat genotypes 2 and 3. Here, reported rates of sustained undetectable viral levels 
now routinely exceed 90%. The costs of treatment are staggering, but cost-eff ec-
tiveness analysis is favourable given the high cure rates and the signiﬁ cant public 
health burden of HCV. Genotypes 4, 5, or 6 are prevalent in lower-income countries 
and have received less attention but limited data where resources do exist suggest 
similarly good response rates.

Meanwhile, the threat of HIV remains. HCV prevalence is ~7% for sexually trans-
mitted HIV and >90% for IV transmission. Untreated HIV may accelerate progress 
of HCV-induced liver ﬁ brosis. All HIV/HCV co-infected patients should be assessed 
for combination antiviral therapy. Given the potential for toxicities and viral resist-
ance mutation, such therapies should be planned and delivered through expert 
services. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   279

_OHCM_10e.indb   279

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

280

Alcoholism

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

An alcoholic is one whose problematic pattern of alcohol use leads to clinically sig-
niﬁ cant impairment or distress, manifested by multiple psychosocial, behavioural, 
or physiological features. Other addictions may coexist. Lifetime prevalence: ~10% 
( ≈ 4%). Denial is a leading feature, so be sure to question relatives.
Organs aff  ected Don’t forget the risk of trauma while intoxicated.
The liver: Normal in 50%;  or GT30—but may be  in any type of liver inﬂ amma-
tion, eg fatty liver, AIH (p284), HBV. Fatty liver: Acute/reversible, but may progress 
to cirrhosis if drinking continues (also seen in obesity, DM, and with amiodarone). 
Alcoholic hepatitis: See BOX ‘Managing alcoholic hepatitis’. 80% progress to cir-
rhosis (hepatic failure in 10%). Cirrhosis: (See p276.) 5yr survival is 48% if drinking 
continues (if not, 77%). Biopsy: Mallory bodies ± neutrophil inﬁ ltrate (can be indis-
tinguishable from NASH, p277).
CNS: Self neglect; memory/cognition: high-potency vitamins IM may reverse it (p714; 
don’t delay!); cortical atrophy; retrobulbar neuropathy; ﬁ ts; falls; wide-based gait; 
neuropathy; confabulation/Korsakoff ’s (p704) ± Wernicke’s encephalopathy (p714).
Gut: Obesity; D&V; gastric erosions; peptic ulcers; varices (p257); pancreatitis (acute 
or chronic); cancer (many types); oesophageal rupture (  vomiting against a closed 
glottis; suspect if shock and surgical emphysema in the neck: Boerhaave’s syndrome).
Blood: MCV; anaemia from: marrow depression, GI bleeding, alcoholism-associated 
folate deﬁ ciency, haemolysis; sideroblastic anaemia. See p326.
Heart: Arrhythmias; BP; cardiomyopathy; sudden death in binge drinkers.
Reproduction: Testicular atrophy; testosterone/progesterone; oestrogen; fetal al-
cohol syndrome—IQ, short palpebral ﬁ ssure, absent philtrum, and small eyes.
Withdrawal starts 10–72h after last drink. Signs: Pulse; BP; tremor; confusion; ﬁ ts; 
hallucinations (delirium trem ens)—may be visual or tactile, eg animals crawling all 
over skin. Consider it in any new (3d) ward patient with acute confusion.
Management Alcohol withdrawal: There is almost no role for hospital inpatient 
‘detox’ as a sole indication for admission however attractive the idea of a ‘quick ﬁ x’ 
may be—community-based services are much better placed to support cessation. 
Admit only if complicating or coexisting medical problems require inpatient treat-
ment. Check BP + TPR/4h. Beware BP. For the 1st 3d give generous chlordiazepoxide, 
eg 10–50mg/6h PO with additional doses PRN, then sum total dose and plan weaning 
regimen over 5–7d. Vitamins may be needed (p714). Prevention: (OHCS p512.) Alcohol-
free beers; price may help promote lower-risk drinking. NB: there are no absolutes: 
risk is a continuum. Suggest: 1 Graceful ways of declining a drink, eg ‘I’m seeing 
what it’s like to go without for a bit’. 2 Not buying him- or herself a drink when it is 
his/her turn. 3 ‘Don’t lift your glass to your lips until after the slowest drinker in your 
group takes a drink.’ 4 ‘Sip, don’t gulp.’ Give follow-up and encouragement. Treating 
established alcoholics: May be rewarding, particularly if they really want to change. 
If so, group therapy or self-help (eg Alcoholics Anonym ous) may be useful—espe-
cially if self-initiated and determined. Encourage the will to change.
Relapse 50% will relapse soon after starting treatment. Acamprosate (p449) may 
help  intense  anxiety,  insomnia,  and  craving.  CI:  pregnancy,  severe  liver  failure, 
creatinine  >120μmol/L.  SE:  D&V,    or  libido;  dose  example:  666mg/8h  PO  if  >60kg 
and <65yrs old.  It should be started as soon as acute withdrawal is complete and 
continued for ~1yr. Disulﬁ ram can be used to treat chronic alcohol dependence. It 
causes  acetaldehyde  build-up  (like  metronidazole)  with  extremely  unpleasant  ef-
fects to any alcohol ingestion—eg ﬂ ushing, throbbing headache, palpitations. Care 
must be taken to avoid alcohol (eg toiletries, food, medicines) since severe reac-
tions can occur. Confer with experts if drugs are to be used.

30  GT is  in 52% of alcoholics; it is also  in 50% of those with non-alcoholic fatty livers. Its best use is not 
in diagnosing alcoholism but in seeing if a raised ALP is likely to be from liver, not bone.

_OHCM_10e.indb   280

_OHCM_10e.indb   280

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

281

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Screening for unhealthy alcohol use
Several screening tools have been validated (eg AUDIT) but these typically require 
detailed questioning and careful scoring. For simplicity, a single-item question has 
much to recommend it, such as ‘How many times in the past year have you had ﬁ ve 
(four for ) or more drinks in a day?’ (+ve if >0; 82% sensitive, 79% speciﬁ c). This can 
be followed up with the easily remembered CAGE questions: Ever felt you ought to 
cut down on your drinking? Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? 
Ever felt guilty about your drinking? Ever had an eye-opener in the morning? Those 
answering ‘yes’ to ≥2 may be exhibiting dependency (sensitivity 43–94%; speciﬁ city 
70–97%), but accuracy does change according to background population. Those who 
refuse, or give unconvincing answers may have more to tell in their biochemistry: 
look for GT, ALT, MCV, AST:ALT>2, urea, platelets.

Managing alcoholic hepatitis
The patient: Malaise; TPR; anor exia; D&V; tender hepatomegaly ± jaundice; bleed-
ing; ascites. Blood: WCC; platelets (toxic eff ect or  hypersplenism); INR; AST; 
MCV; urea. Jaundice, encephalopathy or coagulopathy ≈ severe hepatitis.
  • Most need hospitalizing; urinary catheter and CVP monitoring may be needed.
  • Screen for infections ± ascitic ﬂ uid tap and treat for SBP (p276).
  • Stop alcohol consumption: for withdrawal symptoms, if chlordiazepoxide by the 

oral route is impossible, try lorazepam IM.

  • Vitamins: vit K: 10mg/d IV for 3d. Thiamine 100mg/d PO (high-dose B vitamins can 
also be given IV as Pabrinex®—1 pair of ampoules in 50mL 0.9% saline IVI over ½h).
  • Optimize nutrition (35–40kcal/kg/d non-protein energy). Use ideal body weight 

for calculations, eg if malnourished.

  • Don’t use low-protein diets even if severe encephalopathy is present. Give >1.2g/

kg/d of protein; this prevents encephalopathy, sepsis, and some deaths.

  • Daily weight; LFT; U&E; INR. If creatinine , get help with this—HRS (p275). Na+ is 

common, but water restriction may make matters worse.

  • Steroids may confer beneﬁ t in those with severe disease. The Maddrey Discrimi-
nant  Factor  (DF) = (4.6 ≈ patient’s  prothrombin  time  in  sec – control  time) + bilirubin 
(μmol/L) roughly reﬂ ects mortality. If Maddrey score >31 and encephalopathy then 
consider prednisolone 40mg/d for 5d tapered over 3wks. CI: sepsis; variceal bleed-
ing. The largest study to date (STOPAH) showed only a non-signiﬁ cant trend towards 
beneﬁ t with this regimen.

Prognosis: Mild episodes hardly aff ect mortality; if severe, mortality ≈ 50% at 30d. 
1yr after admission for alcoholic hepatitis, 40% are dead...a sobering thought.

_OHCM_10e.indb   281

_OHCM_10e.indb   281

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

282

Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC)

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Interlobular  bile  ducts  are  damaged  by  chronic  autoimmune  granul omat ous31  in-
ﬂ ammation  causing  cholestasis  which  may  lead  to  ﬁ brosis,  cirrhosis,  and  portal 
hypertension.  Cause  Unknown  environmental  triggers  (?pollutants,  xenobiotics, 
non-pathogenic bacteria) + genetic predisposition (eg IL12A locus) leading to loss of 
immune tolerance to self-mitochondrial proteins. Antimitochondrial antibodies 
(AMA) are the hallmark of PBC. Prevalence 4/100 000. : ≈ 9:1. Risk  if +ve fam-
ily history (seen in 1–6%); many UTIS; smoking; past pregnancy; other auto immune 
diseases;  use of nail polish/hair dye. Typical age at presentation ~50yrs.
The patient Often asymptomatic and diagnosed after incidental ﬁ nding ALP. Leth-
argy, sleepiness, and pruritus may precede jaundice by years. Signs: Jaundice; skin 
pigmentation;  xanthelasma  (p691);  xanth omata;  hepatosplenomegaly.  Complica-
tions: Those of cirrhosis (p276); osteoporosis is common. Malabsorption of fat-soluble 
vitamins (A, D, E, K) due to cholestasis and bilirubin in the gut lumen results in osteo-
malacia and coag ulopathy; HCC (p286).
Tests  Blood:  ALP,  GT,  and  mildly  AST  &  ALT;  late  disease:  bilirubin,  albumin, 
prothrombin time. 98% are AMA M2 subtype +ve, eg in a titre of 1:40 (see earlier in 
topic). Other autoantibodies (p553) may occur in low titres. Immunoglobulins are  
(esp. IgM). TSH & cholesterol  or . Ultrasound: Excludes extrahepatic cholestasis. 
Biopsy: Not usually needed (unless drug-induced cholestasis or hepatic sarcoidosis 
need excluding); look for granulomas around bile ducts ± cirrhosis.31
Treatment Symptomatic: Pruritus: try colestyramine 4–8g/24h PO; naltrexone and 
rifampicin may also help. Diarrhoea: codeine phosphate, eg 30mg/8h PO. Osteoporo-
sis prevention: p682. Speciﬁ c: Fat-soluble vitamin prophylaxis: vitamin A, D, and K. 
Consider high-dose ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)Ωit may improve survival and delay 
transplantation. SE: weight. Monitoring: Regular LFT; ultrasound ± AFP twice-yearly 
if cirrhotic. Liver transplantation: (See p277.) For end-stage disease or intractable 
pruritus. Histological recurrence in the graft: ~17% after 5yrs; although graft failure 
can occur as a result of recurrence, it is rare and unpredictable.
Prognosis Highly variable. The Mayo survival model is a validated predictor of survival 
that combines age, bilirubin, albumin, PT time, oedema, and need for diuretics.

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) 

Progressive cholestasis with bile duct inﬂ ammation and strictures (ﬁ gs 6.30, 6.31).
Symptoms/signs Pruritus ± fatigue; if advanced: ascending cholangitis, cirr hosis, and 
hepatic failure. Associations: •  sex. • HLA-A1; B8; DR3. • AIH (p284); >80% of Northern 
European patients also have IBD, usually UC; this combination is associated with risk 
of colorectal malignancy.
Cancers Bile duct, gallbladder, liver, and colon cancers are more common, so do 
yearly colonoscopy + ultrasound; consider cholecystectomy for gallbladder polyps.32
Tests ALP, then bilirubin; hyper gammaglobulin aemia and/or IgM; AMA Ωve, but ANA, 
SMA, and ANCA may be +ve; see BOX and p553. ERCP (ﬁ g 6.30) or MRCP (ﬁ g 6.31) reveal 
duct anatomy and damage. Liver biopsy shows a ﬁ brous, obliterative cholangitis.
Treatment Liver transplant is the mainstay for end-stage disease; recurrence oc-
curs  in  up  to  30%;  5yr  graft  survival  is  >60%.  Prognosis  is  worse  for  those  with 
IBD, as 5–10% develop colorectal cancer post-transplant. Ursodeoxycholic acid may 
improve LFT but has not shown evidence of survival beneﬁ t. High doses, eg 25–30mg/
kg/d, may be harmful. Colestyr amine 4–8g/24h PO for pruritus (naltrexone and ri-
fampicin may also help). Antibiotics for bacterial cholangitis.

31  Other  causes  of  liver  granulomas:  TB,  sarcoid,  infections  with  HIV  (eg  toxoplasmosis,  CMV,  mycobacte-
ria),  PAN,  SLE, granulomatosis  with  polyangiitis,  lymphoma,  syphilis,  isoniazid, quinidine, carbamazepine, al-
lopurinol. Signs: PUO; LFT.
32  Usually gallbladder polyps are an incidental ﬁ nding on ultrasound, and they can often be left if <1cm 
diameter, but in PSC they are much more likely to become malignant.

_OHCM_10e.indb   282

_OHCM_10e.indb   282

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Testing for autoantibodies—the anguish of partial understanding
The diagnostic approach to several inﬂ ammatory conditions includes the measure-
ment of autoantibodies. Consequently and all too often, attempts to acquire (and 
test) medical knowledge may promote these antibody panels to a position as the 
ﬁ nal arbiter of disease diagnosis which, with their varying sensitivities and spe-
ciﬁ cities, they are quite unﬁ t to assume. Indeed, often just such a work-up shows 
strange overlap conditions between apparently diff erent diseases: strange until we 
realize that these markers are just surrogates for processes that we lack a complete 
aetiological explanation for and in which the antibodies themselves may just be 
bystanders. Process that we lack the tools to visualize, as cells of the immune system 
continue their onslaught against their perceived enemies, driven by reasons that 
none present seem willing to reveal to our crude probing with blood tests, X-rays 
and biopsies. While the body knows no diseases, only pain and death, our minds 
attempt to impose a unitary disease on unsuspecting and sometimes innocent cells.
For example, clinically we observe that autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) frequently 
overlaps  with  PSC  and  IBD.  A  battery  of  antibody  tests  may  sometimes  help 
understand the dominant process, but equally may mystify matters still further if 
we attempt to apply our inadequate classiﬁ ers (‘But why is the ANCA not positive?’ 
cries the student, enraged at the failure of the miserable patient’s B lymphocytes 
to  do  the  honourable  thing).  As  ever,  management  should  be  individualized 
dependent on liver and bowel histology, serum immunoglobulin levels, the degree 
of biochemical cholestasis, cholangiography, and, yes, autoantibodies.

283

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig  6.30  ERCP  showing  many  stric-
tures in the biliary tree with a charac-
teristic ‘beaded’ appearance.

© Dr Anthony Mee.

Fig 6.31  MRCP showing features of PSC. The intrahe-
patic ducts show multifocal strictures. Strictures can 
be  hard  to  diff erentiate  from  cholangiocarcinoma 
(coexistence  of  UC  may  promote  this  development). 
Stenting may be needed.

©Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   283

_OHCM_10e.indb   283

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

284

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

An inﬂ ammatory liver disease of unknown cause33 characterized by abnormal T-cell 
function and autoantibodies directed against hepatocyte surface antigens. Classiﬁ ca-
tion is by autoantibodies (see table 6.12). AIH predominantly aff ects young or middle-
aged  women  (bimodal,  ie  10–30yrs—or  >40yrs  old).  Up  to  40%  present  with  acute 
hepatitis and signs of autoimmune disease, eg fever, malaise, urticarial rash, polyar-
thritis, pleurisy, pulmonary inﬁ ltration, or glomerulo nephritis. The remainder present 
with gradual jaundice or are asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally with signs of 
chronic liver disease. Amenorrhoea is common and disease tends to attenuate during 
pregnancy. Complications Those associated with cirrhosis (p276) and drug therapy.
Tests Serum bilirubin, AST, ALT, and ALP all usually , hypergammaglobulinaemia (esp. 
IgG), +ve autoantibodies (see table 6.12). Anaemia, WCC, and platelets indicate hy-
persplenism. Liver biopsy: (See p248.) Mononuclear inﬁ ltrate of portal and peripor-
tal areas and piecemeal necrosis ± ﬁ brosis; cirrhosis ≈ worse prognosis. MRCP: (See 
p742.) Helps exclude PSC if ALP  disproportionately.
Diagnosis Depends on excluding other diseases (no lab test is pathognomonic). Di-
agnostic criteria based on IgG levels, autoantibodies, and histology in the absence 
of  viral  disease  are  helpful. Sometimes  diagnosis  is  a  challenge—there  is  overlap 
with other chronic liver disease: eg PBC (p282), PSC (p282) and chronic viral hepatitis.
Table 6.12  Classifying autoimmune hepatitis: types I–II

I Seen in 80%. Typical patient:  <40yrs. Antismooth muscle antibodies (ASMA) +ve 
in 80% . Antinuclear antibody (ANA) +ve in 10%. IgG in 97%. Good response to 
immunosuppression in 80%. 25% have cirrhosis at presentation.

II Commoner in Europe than USA. More often seen in children, and more commonly 
progresses to cirrhosis and less treatable. Typically anti-liver/kidney microsomal 
type 1 (LKM1) antibodies +ve. ASMA and ANA Ωve.

Management  Immunosuppressant  therapy:  Prednisolone  30mg/d  PO  for  1 
month;   by  5mg  a  month  to  a  maintenance  dose  of  5–10mg/d  PO.  Corticoster-
oids  can  sometimes  be  stopped  after  2yrs  but  relapse  occurs  in  50–86%.  Aza-
thioprine (50–100mg/d  PO) may be used as a steroid-sparing agent to maintain 
remission.  Remission  is  achievable  in  80%  of  patients  within  3yrs.  10-  and  20yr 
survival  rates  are  >80%.   SES  are  a  big  problem  (p376)—partly  ameliorated  by  a 
switch to budesonide, eg in non-cirrhotic AIH. 
Liver  transplantation: (See p277.) Indicated for decompensated cirrhosis or if 
there is failure to respond to medical therapy, but recurrence may occur. It is ef-
fective (actuarial 10yr survival is 75%).
Prognosis  Appears  not  to  matter  whether  symptomatic  or  asymptomatic  at 
presentation (10yr survival ~80% for both). The presence of cirrhosis at presenta-
tion reduces 10yr survival from 94% to 62%. Overlap syndromes: AIH-PBC (primary 
biliary cholangitis) overlap is worse than AIH-AIC (autoimmune cholangitis).

Associations of autoimmune hepatitis
•Pernicious anaemia
•Ulcerative colitis
•Glomerulonephritis
•Autoimmune thyroiditis

•Autoimmune haemolysis
•Diabetes mellitus
•PSC (p282)
•HLA A1, B8, and DR3 haplotype.

33  Hepatotropic  viruses  (eg  measles,  herpes  viruses)  and  some  drugs  appear  to  trigger  AIH  in  geneti-
cally  predisposed  individuals  exposed  to  a  hepatotoxic  milieu  intérieur.  Viral  interferon  can  inactivate 
cytochrome P450 enzymes (  metabolism of ex- or endogenous hepatotoxins). Resulting modiﬁ cations to 
proteins may generate autoantigens driving CD4 T-helper cell activation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   284

_OHCM_10e.indb   284

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)

285

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

The commonest liver disorder in Western industrialized countries (prevalence≈20%), 
NAFLD12 represents fat in hepatocytes (steatosis) visualized, eg on ultrasound that 
cannot be attributed to other causes (most commonly alcohol so consider NAFLD if 
drink <18U/wk, <9U). If inﬂ ammation is also present (LFT, typically ALT) = non-al-
coholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Rule out other causes of liver disease (p284) and check 
for associated metabolic disorders (obesity, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, hypertension). 
Progression to cirrhosis may occur—biopsy or elastography may be needed (p248). 
Risk factors for progression Older age; obesity; DM; NASH. Treatment Control risk 
factors, including obesity (bariatic surgery helps). Address cardiovascular risk (com-
monest cause of death, see p93). Avoid alcohol consumption. No drug is of proven 
beneﬁ t, though vitamin E may improve histology in ﬁ brosis (eg 400IU/d—higher doses 
associated with excess mortality). Follow-up Monitor for complications (NASH, cir-
rhosis, DM). If cirrhotic, screen for HCC with ultrasound ± AFP twice-yearly.

Wilson’s disease/hepatolenticular degeneration

Wilson’s disease is a rare (3/100 000) inherited disorder of copper excretion with excess 
deposition in liver and CNS (eg basal ganglia). It is treatable, so screen all with cirrhosis.
Genetics An autosomal recessive disorder of a copper transporting ATPase, ATP7B.
Physiology  Total body copper content is ~125mg. Intake ≈ 3mg/day (absorbed in 
proximal small intestine). In the liver, copper is incorporated into caeruloplasmin. In 
Wilson’s disease, copper incorporation into caeruloplasmin in hepatocytes and ex-
cretion into bile are impaired. Copper accumulates in liver, and later in other organs.
Signs Children present with liver disease (hepatitis, cirrhosis, fulmin ant liver fail-
ure); young adults often start with CNS signs: tremor; dysarthria, dys ph agia; dyski-
nesias; dystonias; dementia; Parkinsonism; ataxia/clumsiness.
Mood: Depres sion/mania; labile emotions; libido; personality change. Ignoring 
these may cause years of needless misery: often the doctor who is good at combin-
ing the analytical and integrative aspects will be the ﬁ rst to make the diagnosis.
Cognition: Memory; slow to solve problems; IQ; delusions; mutism.
Kayser–Fleis cher  (KF)  rings:  Copper  in  iris  (see  6  in  following  list);  they  are  not 
invariable.
Also: Haemolysis; blue lunulae (nails); arthritis; hypermobile joints; grey skin.
Tests Equivocal copper studies need expert interpretation.

1      Urine: 24h copper excretion is high, eg >100mcg/24h (normal <40mcg).
2      LFT: non-speciﬁ c (but ALT >1500 is not part of the picture).
3      Serum copper: typically <11μmol/L.
4      Serum  caeruloplasmin:  <200mg/L  (<140mg/L  is  pathognomonic)—beware 
incidental low values in protein-deﬁ ciency states (eg nephrotic syndrome, mal-
absorption).

5      Molecular genetic testing can conﬁ rm the diagnosis.
6      Slit lamp exam: KF rings: in iris/Descemet’s membrane (ﬁ g 5.42 OHCS p452).
7      Liver biopsy: Hepatic copper (copper >250mcg/g dry weight); hepatitis; cirrhosis.
8      MRI: degeneration in basal ganglia, fronto-temporal, cerebellar, and brainstem. 
Management Diet: Avoid foods with high copper content (eg liver, chocolate, nuts, 
mushrooms, legumes, and shellﬁ sh). Check water sources (eg wells, pipes) for cop-
per. Drugs: Lifelong penicillamine (500mg/6–8h PO for 1yr, mainten ance 0.75–1g/d). 
SES: nausea, rash, WCC, Hb, platelets, haematuria, nephrosis, lupus. Monitor FBC and 
urinary copper and protein excretion. Liver transplantation: (See p277.) If severe 
liver disease. Screen siblings: Asympto matic homozygotes need treating.
Prognosis Pre-cirrhotic liver disease is reversible; CNS damage less so. There are 
no clear clinical prognostic indicators. Fatal events: liver failure, bleeding, infection.

_OHCM_10e.indb   285

_OHCM_10e.indb   285

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

286

Liver tumours

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

The commonest (90%) liver tumours are metastases (see ﬁ g 6.32), eg from breast, 
bronchus, or the gastrointestinal tract (see table 6.14). Primary hepatic tumours are 
much less common and may be benign or malignant (see table 6.13).
Symptoms  Fever,  malaise,  anorexia,  weight,  RUQ  pain  (  liver  capsule  stretch). 
Jaundice  is  late,  except  with  cholangiocarcinoma.  Benign  tumours  are  often 
asymptomatic. Tumours may rupture causing intraperitoneal haemorrhage.
Signs Hepatomegaly (smooth, or hard and irregular, eg metastases, cirrhosis, HCC). 
Look for signs of chronic liver disease (p276) and evidence of decompensation (jaun-
dice, ascites). Feel for an abdominal mass. Listen for a bruit over the liver (HCC).
Tests Blood: FBC, clotting, LFT, hepatitis serology, -fetoprotein ( in 50–80% of HCC, 
though levels do not correlate with size, stage, or prognosis). Imaging: US or CT 
to identify lesions and guide biopsy. MRI is better at distinguishing benign from ma-
lignant lesions. Do ERCP (p742) and biopsy if cholangiocarcinoma is suspected. Liver 
biopsy: (See p248.) May achieve a histological diagnosis; careful multidisciplinary 
discussion is required if potentially resectable, as bleeding or seeding along the bi-
opsy tract can occur. If the lesion could be a metastasis, ﬁ nd the primary, eg by CXR, 
mammography, colon o scopy, CT, MRI, or marrow biopsy.
Liver metastases Signify advanced disease. Treatment and prognosis vary with 
the type and extent of primary tumour. Chemotherapy may be eff ective (eg lympho-
mas, germ cell tumours). Small, solitary metastases may be amenable to resection 
(eg colorectal cancer). In most, treatment is palliative. Prognosis: Often <6 months.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) Primary hepatocyte neoplasia accounts for 90% 
of primary liver cancers; it is common in China & Africa (40% of cancers vs 2% in UK).
The patient: Fatigue, appetite, RUQ pain, weight, jaundice, ascites, haemobilia.34 : ≈ 3.
Causes: HBV is the leading cause worldwide (esp. if high viral load; p278). HCV;35 AIH 
(p284); cirrhosis (alcohol, haemochrom atosis, PBC); non-alcoholic fatty liver; aﬂ atox-
in; Clonorchis sinensis; anabolic steroids.
: 3-phase CT (delayed wash-out of contrast in a suspect mass); MRI; biopsy.
Treatment: Resecting solitary tumours <3cm across  3yr survival from 13% to 59%; 
but  ~50%  have  recurrence  by  3yrs.36  Liver  transplant  gives  a  5yr  survival  rate  of 
70%.37 Percutaneous ablation, tumour embolization (TACE38), and sorafenib are options.  
Prevention: HBV  vaccination (BOX and  table  6.15).  Don’t  reuse  needles. Screen 
blood. Aﬂ atox in exposure (sun-dry maize). AFP ± ultrasound (eg 6-monthly screen): 
Consider if at  risk: eg all with cirrhosis; or chronic HBV in Africans or older Asians.
Cholangiocarcinoma (Biliary tree cancer.) ~10% of liver primaries. Causes: Flukes 
(Clonorchis, p435); PSC (screening by CA19–9 may be helpful, p282); biliary cysts; Caro-
li’s disease, p272; HBV; HCV; DM; N-nitroso toxins. 
The patient: Fever, abdominal pain (± ascites), malaise, bilirubin; ALP.
Pathology: Usually slow-growing. Most are distal extrahepatic or perihilar.
Management: 70% inoperable at presentation. Of those that are, 76% recur. Surgery: 
eg major hepatectomy + extrahepatic bile duct excision + caudate lobe res ec tion. 5yr 
survival ~30%.  Post-op complications include liver failure, bile leak, and GI bleeding.  
Stenting of obstructed extrahepatic biliary tree, percutaneously or via ERCP (p742), 
improves quality of life. Liver transplantation rarely possible. Prognosis: ~5 months.
Benign tumours Haemangiomas: The commonest benign liver tumours. They are 
often an incidental ﬁ nding on ultrasound or CT and don’t require treatment. Avoid 
biopsy!  Adenomas:  Common.  Causes:  anabolic  steroids,  oral  contraceptive  pill; 
pregnancy. Only treat if symptomatic, or >5cm.

34  Haemobilia is late in HCC. Think of bleeding into the biliary tree whenever Quincke’s triad obtains: RUQ 
pain, upper GI haemorrhage, and jaundice. It may be life-threatening.
35  5yr cumulative risk if cirrhosis is present is 30% in Japan and 17% in USA.
36  Operative  mortality:  1.6%.  Recurrence  is  more  likely  if  histology  showed  neoplastic  emboli  in  small 
vessels. Get early warning of recurrence by arranging imaging, eg if AFP >5.45mcg/L (esp. if trend is ris-
ing). Fibrolamellar HCC, which occurs in children and young adults, has a better prognosis.
37  Milan criteria for liver transplantation in HCC: 1 nodule <5cm or 2–3 nodules <3cm.
38  TACE=transarterial chemoembolization, eg with drug-eluting beads; it causes fever and abdo pain in 50%.

_OHCM_10e.indb   286

_OHCM_10e.indb   286

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

287

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Table 6.13  Primary liver tumours
Malignant (prognosis—regardless of 
type—is poor)

Benign

HCC

Cholangiocarcinoma
Angiosarcoma
Hepatoblastoma
Fibrosarcoma & hepatic gastrointestinal stro-
mal tumour (GIST†, formerly leiomyosarcoma)

Cysts
Haemangioma;* common, :≈5:1
Adenoma
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Fibroma
Benign GIST (=leiomyoma)

* Haemangiomas are hyperechoic on ultrasound; may be part of von Hippel–Lindau syndrome; may need 
surgery if diagnosis is uncertain (may be confused with HCC) or they are enlarging on 6-monthly US.
† GISTs are mesenchymal tumours that are more likely to be found in the gut as a 
spherical mass arising from the muscularis propria, eg with GI bleeding. If unresectable, 
imatinib  2yr survival from 26% to 76%.

Table 6.14  Origins of secondary liver tumours
Common in men
Stomach
Lung
Colon

Common in women
Breast
Colon
Stomach
Uterus

Less common (either sex)
Pancreas
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Carcinoid tumours

Vaccinating to prevent hepatitis B (and associated complications)
Use hepatitis B vaccine 1mL into deltoid; repeat at 1 & 6 mon ths (child: 0.5mL ≈ 3 
into the anterolateral thigh). Indications: Everyone (WHO advice, even in areas 
of ‘low’ endemicity—in 2014 this meant that 82% of the world’s children received 
protection against HBV).  This contrasts with the approach in eg the UK and USA of 
targeting at-risk groups (p278). The immunocompromised and others may need 
further doses. Serology helps time boosters and ﬁ nds non-responders (correlates 
with older age, smoking, and  sex). Know your own antibody level!
Table 6.15  Post-immunization anti-HBs titres and actions

>1000
100–1000
<100
<10

Anti-HBs (IU/L) Actions and comments (advice diff  ers in some areas)
Good level of immunity; retest in ~4yrs.
Good level of immunity; if level approaches 100, retest in 1yr.
Inadequate; give booster and retest.
Non-responder; give another set of 3 vaccinations. Retest; if <10 get 
consent to check hepatitis B status: HBSAg +ve means chronic infection; 
anti-HB core +ve represents past infection and immunity. If a non-re-
sponder is deemed susceptible to HBV, and has recently come in contact 
with risky bodily ﬂ uids, off er 2 doses of anti-hep B immunoglobulin.

NB: protection begins some weeks after dose 1, so it won’t work if exposure is rec-
ent; here, speciﬁ c antihepatitis B immunoglobulin is best if not already immunized.

Fig  6.32  Axial  CT  of  the  liver 
after IV contrast showing multiple 
round lesions of varying size, highly 
suggestive of hepatic metastases.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

_OHCM_10e.indb   287

_OHCM_10e.indb   287

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

288

Hereditary haemochromatosis (HH)

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

An inherited disorder of iron metabolism in which intestinal iron absorption leads to 
iron deposition in joints, liver, heart, pancreas, pituitary, adrenals, and skin. Middle-
aged men are more frequently and severely aff ected than women, in whom the dis-
ease tends to present ~10yrs later (menstrual blood loss is protective).
Genetics HH is one of the commonest inherited conditions in those of Northern Euro-
pean (especially Celtic) ancestry (carrier rate of ~1 in 10 and a frequency of homozy-
gosity of ~1 in 200–400). The gene responsible for most HH is HFE: the 2 commonest 
mutations are termed C282Y and H63D. C282Y accounts for 60–90% of HH, and H63D 
accounts for 1–3%, with compound heterozygotes accounting for 4–7%. Penetrance 
is variable—a signiﬁ cant fraction of C282Y homozygotes will not develop signs of iron 
overload during follow-up, complicating screening decisions.
The patient Early on: Nil—or tiredness; arthralgia (2nd+3rd MCP joints + knee pseudo-
gout);  libido.  Later:  Slate-grey  skin  pigmentation;  signs  of  chronic  liver  disease 
(p276);  hepatomegaly;  cirrhosis  (esp.  if  drinks  alcohol);  dilated  cardiomyopathy. 
Endocrinopathies: DM (‘bronze diabetes’ from iron deposition in pancreas); hypogonadism 
(p232) from pituitary dysfunction.
Tests Blood: LFT, ferritin (>200/>150ng/mL; but inﬂ ammation will also ferritin); 
transferrin saturation39 should all trigger suspicion. Conﬁ rm by HFE genotyping.
Images: Chondro calcinosis  (ﬁ g 6.33). Liver & cardiac MRI: Fe overload.
Liver biopsy: Perl’s stain quantiﬁ es iron loading40 and assesses disease severity.
Management Venesect: ~0.5–2 units/1–2wks, until ferritin 50mcg/L (may take 2yrs). 
Iron will continue to accumulate, so maintenance venesection is needed for life (1U every 
2–3 months to maintain haematocrit <0.5, ferritin <100mcg/L, and transferrin saturation 
<40%). Consider desferrioxamine (p342) if intolerant of this. Monitor: LFT and glucose/
diabetes (p206). HbA1c levels may be falsely low as venesection  the time available for 
Hb glycosylation. If cirrhotic, screen for HCC with ultrasound ± AFP twice-yearly.
Over-the-counter drugs: Ensure vitamin preparations contain no iron.
Diet: A well-balanced diet should be encouraged—there is no need to avoid iron-rich 
foods. Avoid alcohol. Avoid uncooked seafood (may contain bacteria that thrive on 
increased plasma iron concentrations, eg Listeria monocytogenes, Vibrio vulniﬁ cus).
Screening: Serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, and  HFE genotype. Screen 1st-
degree relatives by genetic testing even if they are asymptomatic and have normal 
LFT ideally prior to age where signiﬁ cant iron deposition likely to have occurred (eg 
18–30yrs). Since  C282Y homozygotes may never develop iron overload, population 
screening should not be performed.
Prognosis Venesection returns life expectancy to normal if non-diabetic and non-cir-
rhotic (and liver histology can improve). Arthropathy may improve or worsen. Gonadal 
failure may reverse in younger men. If cirrhosis, 22–30% get hepatocellular cancer, 
especially if: age >50yrs (risk  ≈ 13), HBsAg +ve (risk  ≈ 5), or alcohol abuse (risk  ≈ 2).

39  Transferrin saturation >45% is a sensitive threshold for further screening but will lead to some false +ves.
40  Although generally not required, biopsy quantiﬁ es hepatic iron loading and ﬁ brosis. This helps deter-
mine the severity of liver disease, particularly in those with other underlying causes of chronic liver disease. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   288

_OHCM_10e.indb   288

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

A bit about iron metabolism
60% of body iron is in haemoglobin, and erythropoiesis requires ~5–30mg iron/
day—provided by macrophages (recycling of haeme iron after phagocytosis of old 
RBCs). Intestinal iron absorption (1–2mg/day) compensates for daily iron losses.

Red  meats,  liver,  seafoods,  enriched  breakfast  cereals  and  pulses,  and  some 
spices (eg paprika) are iron-rich. Most dietary iron is Fe3+, which is reduced by 
low gastric pH and ascorbic acid (vitamin C) to better-absorbed Fe2+. Absorption 
occurs mainly in the duodenum and jejunum, though very small amounts are ab-
sorbed in the stomach and ileum. Iron requirements are greater for women (men-
strual loss), when growing, in pregnancy, and in chronic infection.

Hepcidin, a peptide synthesized in hepatocytes, secreted in plasma, is a negative 
regulator  of  gut  iron  absorption  and  haeme  iron  recycling  by  macrophages. 
Hepcidin synthesis is stimulated by iron and repressed by iron deﬁ ciency and by 
 marrow erythropoiesis (eg in anaemia, bleeding, haemolysis, dyserythropoiesis, or 
erythropoietin injections). Defects in the normal triggering of hepcidin by iron excess 
is a rare cause of haemochromatosis unrelated to HFE mutations, whereas a defect 
in hepcidin repression is responsible for an iron refractory iron deﬁ ciency anaemia.
In HH, the total body iron is up to 10-fold that of a normal person, with load-
ing found particularly in the liver and pancreas (≈100). Hepatic disease classically 
starts with ﬁ brosis, progressing to cirrhosis as a late feature.

289

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Fig 6.33  Haemochromatosis causes stressed joints to deteriorate faster than resting joints: the 
2nd and 3rd MCP joints have osteophytes and narrowed joint spaces compared to the normal hand 
(right image) in this man who only used his dominant hand for his production line job.

Reproduced from ‘Haemochromatosis arthropathy and repetitive trauma’, Annals of the Rheumatic 
Diseases, Morgan et al., 61(8): 763, 2002, with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

_OHCM_10e.indb   289

_OHCM_10e.indb   289

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

290

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

 1-antitrypsin (A1AT) deﬁ ciency
A1AT deﬁ ciency is an inherited disorder aff ecting lung (emphysema) and liver (cirrho-
sis and HCC). A1AT is a glycoprotein and one of a family of serine protease inhibitors made 
in the liver that control inﬂ ammatory cascades. Deﬁ ciency is called a serpinopathy. 
It makes up 90% of serum 1-glob ulin on electrophoresis (p687). A1AT deﬁ ciency is 
the chief genetic cause of liver disease in children. In adults, its lack is more likely 
to cause emphy  sema. Lung  A1AT protects against tissue damage from neutrophil 
elastase—a process that is also induced by cigarette smoking (p184). Prevalence 
~1:4000 (higher in Caucasians).
Genetics Genetic variants of A1AT are typed by electro phor etic mobility as medium 
(M), slow (S), or very slow (Z). S and Z types are due to single amino acid substitutions 
at positions 264 and 342, respectively. These result in production of 1-antitrypsin 
(S=60%, Z=15%). The normal genotype is PiMM, the high risk homozygote is Pi ZZ; het-
erozygotes are PiMZ and PiSZ (at low risk of developing liver disease).
The patient Symptomatic patients usually have the Pi ZZ genotype: dyspnoea from 
emphysema; cirrhosis; cholestatic jaundice. Cholestasis often remits in adolescence.
Tests Serum 1-antitrypsin (1AT) levels , usually (eg <11μmol/L or <75% of lower 
limit of normal, which is ~0.9g/L; labs vary). Note the ‘usually’. Because A1AT is part of 
the acute-phase response, inﬂ ammation may hide a low level. Unless you do genotyp-
ing, you will inevitably mis-label some cirrhosis as cryptogenic. Lung function testing: 
Shows reductions in FEV1 with obstructive pattern (p162). There may be some bronch-
dilator reversibility. Liver biopsy: (See p248.) Periodic acid Schiff  (PAS) +ve; diastase-re-
sistant globules. Phenotyping: By isoelectric focusing requires expertise to distinguish 
SZ and ZZ phenotypes. Phenotyping can miss null phenotypes. Prenatal diagnosis: Pos-
sible by DNA analysis of chorionic villus samples obtained at 11–13wks’ gestation.
Management Smok ing cessation. Prompt treatment/preventative vaccination for 
lung infections. Giving IV A1AT pooled from human plasma is expensive but COPD ex-
acerbations may be prevented (no good randomized trials). Liver transplantation: 
Needed in decompensated cirrhosis. Lung transplantation: Improves survival and 
has  a  comparable  survival  to  transplantation  in  non-A1AT-deﬁ cient  COPD.  Inhaled 
A1AT: Has been tried in lung disease.
Prognosis  Some  patients  have  life-threatening  symptoms  in  childhood,  whereas 
others remain asymptomatic and healthy into old age. Worse prognosis if male, a 
smoker, or obese. Emphysema is the cause of death in most, liver disease in ~5%. In 
adults, cirrhosis ± HCC aff ect 25% of A1AT-deﬁ cient adults >50yrs.

_OHCM_10e.indb   290

_OHCM_10e.indb   290

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

291

l

y
g
o
o
r
e
t
n
e
o
r
t
s
a
G

Approaches to abnormal liver function tests (LFTS)
Abnormal LFTS can be found in ~17% of the asymptomatic general population. Also, 
remember that a normal LFT does not exclude liver disease.
Tests of hepatocellular injury or cholestasis
Aminotransferases: (AST, ALT) Released in the bloodstream after hepatocellular 
injury. ALT is more speciﬁ c for hepatocellular injury (but also expressed in kidney 
and muscle). AST is also expressed in the heart, skeletal muscle, and RBCS. 
Alkaline phosphatase: May originate from liver, bone (so raised in growing chil-
dren) or placenta.
Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT; GT): Present in liver, pancreas, renal tubules, 
and intestine—but not bone, so it helps tell if a raised ALP is from bone (GGT) or 
liver (GGT). NB: it is not speciﬁ c to alcohol damage to the liver.
Tests of hepatic function Serum albumin, serum bilirubin, PT (INR).
Hepatocellular predominant liver injury AST & ALT. Evaluate promptly, consid-
er medications, collateral history from family (‘Could he be consuming alcohol?’); 
ultrasound for fatty liver, metastases , viral serology (hepatitis A, B, C, E, EBV, CMV).
Alcoholic liver disease: AST/ALT ratio is typically 2:1 or more. When the history is 
not reliable, normal ALP, GGT, and macrocytosis suggest this condition. 
Acute viral hepatitis: ALT; bilirubin may be . NB: AST may be , p278, p281.
Chronic viral hepatitis: ALT; HBV & C are a leading cause worldwide.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH): Occurs mainly in young and middle-aged females.
Fatty  inﬁ ltration  of  the  liver:  (See  p285.)  Probably  the  chief  cause  of  mildly 
raised LFTS in the general population and may be recognized on ultrasound.
Ischaemic hepatitis: Can be seen in conditions when eff ective circulatory volume 
is low (eg MI, hypotension, haemorrhage). ALT, as well as LDH. 
Drug-induced hepatitis: As no speciﬁ c serology identiﬁ es most culprits, a good 
history is vital. Paracetamol overdose causes most acute liver failure in the UK.
Cholestasis predominant liver injury ALP and GGT are ; AST and ALT mildly.
Management For each speciﬁ c diagnosis, manage accordingly. If asymptomatic 
and other tests are Ωve, try lifestyle modiﬁ cation. Help reduce weight and alcohol 
use (p280 & OHCS p512); control DM & dyslipidaemia; stop hepatotoxic drugs.
Follow-up Repeat tests after 1–2 months; if still , do US (± abdominal CT).  If di-
agnosis still unclear, get help: is biopsy needed? Consider (if you haven’t already) 
 1-antitrypsin levels, serum caeruloplasmin (Wilson’s disease), coeliac serology, 
ANA and ASMA (AIH, p284). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   291

_OHCM_10e.indb   291

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

7  Renal medicine

Contents
Urine  294
Urinary tract infection (UTI)  296
Acute kidney injury (AKI):
  A clinical approach  298
  Management  300
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)  302
  Management  304
Renal replacement therapy (RRT):
  Dialysis and ﬁ ltration  306
  Transplantation  308
Glomerulonephritis  310
Nephrotic syndrome  312
Renal manifestations of 
systemic disease  314

The renal tubule: disorders and 

diuretics  316

Tubulointerstitial nephropathy and 

nephrotoxins  318

Inherited kidney disease  320

Fig 7.1  A ‘rotating drum artiﬁ cial kidney’: one of 
the earliest dialysis machines built by Willem Kolff  
in 1943. Exiled to a remote Dutch hospital during the 
Nazi occupation of the Netherlands, the resourceful 
inventor assembled a junkyard construction using 
a water pump from a Ford model T, an aluminium 
drum from a downed warplane, washing machine 
parts,  orange  juice  cans,  and  sausage  skins.  The 
ﬁ rst 16 patients to use the machine died. Then, in 
1945, 67-year-old Soﬁ a Maria Schafstadt (‘Patient 
Number 17’) was referred reluctantly to Kolff  with 
‘poisoning’.  Her  blood  was  passed  through  his 
sausage-skin tube which was wrapped around the 
drum, rotating like a washing machine in a bath of 
salt water. A total of 80L of her blood was treated 
in this way, removing 60g of urea. After 11 hours she 
opened her eyes to declare, ‘I’m going to divorce my 
husband’. This she duly achieved, as well as making 
medical history. Kolff  chose not to patent his life-
saving  invention  but  donated  copies  to  hospitals 
across the world. 

We thank Dr Andrew Mooney, our Specialist Reader, for his contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   292

_OHCM_10e.indb   292

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

293

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Renal disease presents as:
1      Asymptomatic disease

  • Non-visible  haematuria:  (NVH,  microscopic  haematuria.)  Detected  on  urine 
dipstick on repeated testing. Most is not due to renal disease and urological 
investigation is ﬁ rst-line for all those aged >40 years. See p294.

  • Asymptomatic  proteinuria:  Normal  renal  protein  excretion  is  less  than 
150mg/24 hours (non-pregnant). Quantiﬁ cation by 24h urine collection is unreli-
able and rarely used in clinical practice. A spot urinary protein to creatinine 
ratio (P:CR) >15mg/mmol or urinary albumin to creatinine ratio (A:CR) >2.5() 
or 3.5()mg/mmol may signify either glomerular (common) or tubular (rare) 
pathology.

  • Abnormal renal function (GFR): The glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (GFR) is a meas-
ure of how much blood the kidneys are cleaning per minute. Direct measure-
ment  is  invasive  and  time-consuming.  Estimations  derived  from  equations 
based on serum creatinine are widely used to give an eGFR (see p669). Errors in 
eGFR are caused by non-steady-state conditions, conditions which alter serum 
creatinine (diet, muscle mass), and eGFR is less accurate at higher levels of GFR. 
eGFR is therefore only part of the assessment of renal function.

  • High blood pressure: A renal aetiology should be excluded if hypertension oc-

curs with any indicators of renal disease: haematuria, proteinuria, eGFR.

  • Electrolyte abnormalities: Disorders of sodium, potassium, and acid–base bal-

ance (pp301 and 670–5) may be due to underlying renal disease.

2      With renal tract symptoms

  • Urinary symptoms: Dysuria is a sensation of discomfort with micturition and 
may be accompanied by urgency, frequency, and nocturia. UTI is the primary 
diff erential. Consider prostatic aetiology if there is diffi  culty initiating voiding, 
poor stream and dribbling. Oliguria (<400mL/24 hours or <0.5mL/kg/hour) and 
anuria  should  trigger  assessment  and  investigation  for  acute  kidney  injury 
(AKI) (see pp298–301). Poly uria is the voiding of abnormally high volumes of 
urine, usually from high ﬂ uid intake. Consider also DM, diabetes insipidus (p240), 
hypercalcaemia (p676), renal medullary disorders (causing impaired concentra-
tion of urine).

  • Loin pain: Ureteric colic is severe and radiates anteriorly and to the groin. It is 
caused by a renal stone, clot, or a sloughed papilla. For pain conﬁ ned to the loin 
consider pyelonephritis, renal cyst pathology, and renal infarct.

  • Visible haematuria: (VH, macroscopic.) Urological investigation is required to 
exclude renal tract malignancy. Nephrological causes include polycystic kidney 
disease and glomerular disease (IgA p311, anti-glomerular basement membrane 
(anti-GBM) disease p311, Alport syndrome p320).

  • Nephrotic  syndrome:  Proteinuria  >3g/24  hours  (=P:CR  >300mg/mmol)  with 
hypoalbuminaemia  (<30g/L)  and  peripheral  oedema.  Renal  biopsy  is  usually 
indicated in adults (p310).

  • Symptomatic chronic kidney disease: Dyspnoea, anorexia, weight loss, pruri-

tus, bone pain, sexual dysfunction, cognitive decline (pp302–5).

3      A systemic disorder with renal involvement

  • DM: (p314.)
  • Metabolic: Sickle cell disease (p315), tuberous sclerosis (p320), Fabry disease 

(p320), cystinosis (p321).

  • Auto-immune:  ANCA-associated  vasculitis  (p314,  556),  SLE  (p314),  Henoch–
Schonlein  purpura  (p311),  systemic  sclerosis  (p315),  sarcoid  (p318),  Sjögren’s 
syndrome (p318, 710).

  • Infection: Sepsis is a common cause of AKI. Speciﬁ c renal involvement may oc-

cur with TB (p392), malaria, chronic hepatitis (p278), HIV (pp398–403).

  • Malignancy: Obstruction, hypercalcaemia, direct toxicity, eg myeloma (p314).
  • Pregnancy: Pre-eclampsia, obstruction.
  • Drugs used in systemic disorders: NSAIDS, ACE-i, ARB, aminoglycosides, chemo-

therapy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   293

_OHCM_10e.indb   293

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
294

Urine

Perform dipstick urinalysis whenever you suspect renal disease. This is a crude way 
of checking whether the urine contains anything that it should not, eg protein, blood, 
glucose. Abnormalities can indicate intrinsic renal disease or renal tract abnormali-
ties and usually require further investigation. However, a dipstick-positive catheter 
sample is diffi  cult to interpret.
Look for a urine dip result (before the catheter was inserted). A positive result 
indicates the need for specialist advice from nephrology/urology. A negative result 
may help to reassure you about the absence of intrinsic renal disease.
Proteinuria
Requires  quantiﬁ cation.  24h  collections  are  rarely  used  due  to  inaccuracy. 
Albumin:creatinine ratio (A:CR) or protein:creatinine ratio (P:CR) is performed on a 
random spot urine sample. Normal A:CR is <2.5() or <3.5(). P:CR is <15. Approximate 
equivalent levels of proteinuria are given in table 7.1.
Table 7.1  Conversion factors
Protein excretion g/24h
0.15 (physiological)
0.5
1
3 (nephrotic range)

A:CR mg/mmol
2.5  or 3.5 
30
70
250

15
50
100
300

P:CR mg/mmol

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Causes of raised A:CR/P:CR: The higher the proteinuria, the more chance it is caused 
by  glomerular  disease,  eg  glomerulonephritis,  DM,  amyloidosis,  myeloma  (though 
dipsticks do not detect light chains). Proteinuria is associated with an risk of cardio-
vascular disease and death. False positive: Postural (repeat using an early morning 
sample), post-exercise, fever, heart failure.
Microalbuminuria: Ultra-sensitive dipsticks are available to measure albuminuria 
(albumin excretion 30–300mg/24h). Suggests early glomerular disease, eg DM, BP.
Haematuria
Blood  in  the  urine  may  arise  from  anywhere  in  the  renal  tract.  Transient  causes 
should be excluded, eg UTI, menstruation. Classiﬁ ed as:
  • visible (VH): previously known as macroscopic, frank
  • non-visible (NVH): found on dipstick/microscopy, previously known as microscopic. 
NVH is subdivided according to the presence of urinary tract symptoms: sympto-
matic (SNVH) or asymptomatic (aNVH).

Causes: Malignancy (kidney, ureter, bladder), calculi, IgA nephropathy, Alport syn-
drome  (p320),  other  glomerulonephritis  (p310),  polycystic  kidney  disease  (p320), 
schistosomiasis. Do not attribute haematuria to anticoagulation without investiga-
tion. False positive: Myoglobin triggers same dipstick reaction—check microscopy.
Management: VH, SNVH, and aNVH >40yr should undergo urological assessment, im-
aging, and cystoscopy to exclude renal tract malignancy and calculi.
A renal aetiology should be considered, and renal referral made, for NVH with:
  • eGFR <60
  • coexistent proteinuria (A:CR >30 or P:CR >50)
  • hypertension >140/90mmHg
  • family history of renal disease.
A cause is not established in 19–68% of patients with NVH. These patients should be 
monitored via BP, eGFR, and repeat A:CR/P:CR every 6 months–1 year. Increasing pro-
teinuria and deteriorating eGFR warrant repeat referral and investigation.
Others
Glucose: DM, pregnancy, sepsis, proximal renal tubular pathology (p316). Ketones: 
Starvation,  keto acidosis.  Leucocytes:  UTI  (p296),  vaginal  discharge.  Nitrites:  UTI 
(enteric  GramΩve  organism).  Bilirubin:  Haemolysis.  Urobilinogen:  Liver  disease, 
haemolysis. Speciﬁ c gravity: Normal range: 1.005–1.030, limited surrogate for urine 
osmolality, aff ected by proteinuria. pH: NR: 4.5–9, usually acidic with meat containing 
diet (acid–base balance: p670, renal tubular acidosis pp316–7).

_OHCM_10e.indb   294

_OHCM_10e.indb   294

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
295

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Urine microscopy
Cells:
Red blood cells:
  • >2 red cells/mm3 is abnormal.
  • Can come from anywhere in the urinary tract. Isomorphic red cells are similar to 
circulating red cells and may suggest bleeding from a genitourinary or external 
source. Dysmorphic red cells are abnormal in size/shape. Although they may in-
dicate bleeding from the glomerulus (especially in exam questions!), assessment 
is  subjective  and  dysmorphism  also  occurs  due  to  changes  in  pH,  osmolality, 
protein, and due to tubular passage.

White blood cells: (ﬁ g 7.2a)
  • >10 white cells/mm3 in an unspun specimen is abnormal.
  • Causes include UTI, glomerulonephritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis, renal trans-

plant rejection, and malignancy.

Squamous epithelial cells:
  • Often seen, not pathological.
Casts:
Casts are cylindrical bodies formed in the lumen of distal tubules. They are formed 
of Tamm-Horsfall protein combined with cells.
  • Hyaline cast (ﬁ g 7.2b)—seen in normal urine.
  • Red cell cast (ﬁ g 7.2c)—signify an inﬂ ammatory process in the glomerulus, eg 

glomerulonephritis (p311).

  • White cell cast (ﬁ g 7.2d)—pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis (p318), glomeru-

lonephritis (p311).

  • Granular  cast  (ﬁ g  7.2e)—formed  from  degenerated  tubular  cells,  seen  in  any 

chronic kidney disease.

Crystals:
Crystals are common in old or cold urine and may not signify pathology. They are 
important in stone formers.
  • Uric acid (ﬁ g 7.2f)(p680)—uric acid stones, tumour lysis syndrome.
  • Calcium oxalate (ﬁ g 7.2g)—stones (p638), high oxalate diet, ethylene glycol poi-

soning.

  • Cystine (ﬁ g 7.2h)—seen in cystinuria (p321).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Fig 7.2  (a) White cells; (b) hyaline cast; (c) red cell cast; (d) white cell cast; (e) granular cast; (f) 
uric acid crystals; (g) calcium oxalate crystals; (h) cystine crystal.

Images (a) to (h) reproduced from Turner et al., Oxford Textbook of Clinical Nephrology, 2005, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   295

_OHCM_10e.indb   295

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
296

Urinary tract infection (UTI)

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Deﬁ nitions Bacteriuria: Bacteria in the urine; may be asymptomatic or sympto-
matic. Bacteriuria is not a disease. UTI:1 A diagnosis based on symptoms and signs. 
Tests which prove bacteria in urine may provide additional information. There is no 
‘gold-standard’ bacterial count. Lower UTI: Bladder (cystitis), prostate (prostatitis). 
Upper UTI: Pyelonephritis = infection of kidney/renal pelvis. Abacterial cystitis/ure-
thral syndrome: A diagnosis of exclusion in patients with dysuria and frequency, 
without demonstrable infection. Urethritis: See pp412–3.
Incidence Annual incidence of  UTI in women is 10–20%. 10% of men and 20% of 
women >65 years have asymptomatic bacteriuria (>65 years MSU is no longer diagnos-
tic and clinical assessment is mandatory). Pyelonephritis = 3 per 1000 patient years.
Classiﬁ cation
  • Uncomplicated: normal renal tract structure and function.
  • Complicated: structural/functional abnormality of genitourinary tract, eg obstruc-

tion, catheter, stones, neurogenic bladder, renal transplant.

Risk factors
  • Bacterial inoculation: Sexual activity, urinary incontinence, faecal incontinence, 

constipation.

  • Binding of uropathogenic bacteria: Spermicide use, oestrogen, menopause.
  • Urine ﬂ ow: Dehydration, obstructed urinary tract (p640).
  • Bacterial growth: DM, immunosuppression, obstruction, stones, catheter, renal 

tract malformation, pregnancy.

Symptoms
  • Cystitis: Frequency, dysuria, urgency, supra pubic pain, polyuria, haematuria.
  • Acute pyelonephritis: Fever, rigor, vomiting, loin pain/tenderness, costovertebral 

pain, associated cystitis symptoms, septic shock.

  • Prostatitis: Pain: perineum, rectum, scrotum, penis, bladder, lower back. Fever, 
malaise, nausea, urinary symptoms, swollen or tender prostate on PR. See p645.
Signs Fever, abdominal or loin tenderness. Check for a distended bladder, enlarged 
prostate. If vaginal discharge, consider PID, see p413.
Do not rely on classical symptoms and signs in a catheterized patient.
Tests In non-pregnant women, if ≥ 3 (or one severe) symptoms of cystitis, and no 
vaginal discharge, treat empirically without further tests.
  • Dipstick: Use in non-pregnant women <65 years with less than three symptoms. 
A negative dipstick reduces probability of  UTI to <20%. Do not use in pregnant 
women. Limited data for men. No diagnostic value in catheterized sample.

  • MSU culture: Conventional cut off  >105 colony-forming units (cfu)/mL (but best di-
agnostic criterion may be >102–103cfu/mL). Use in pregnant women, men, children, 
and if fail to respond to empirical antibiotics. Catheterized sample only if septic.
  • Blood tests: If systemically unwell: FBC, U&E, CRP, and blood culture (positive in only 

10–25% of pyelonephritis). Consider fasting glucose.

  • Imaging: Consider USS and referral to urology for assessment (cystoscopy, urody-
namics, CT) in men with upper UTI; failure to respond to treatment; recurrent UTI 
(>2/year); pyelonephritis; unusual organism; persistent haematuria.

Organisms Usually anaerobes and Gram-negative bacteria from bowel and vaginal 
ﬂ ora. E. coli is the main organism (75–95% in community but  in hospital). Staphylo-
coccus saprophyticus (a skin commensal) in 5–10%. Other enterobacteriaceae such 
as Proteus mirabilis and Klebsiella pneumonia. For sterile pyuria see table 7.2.
Table 7.2  Causes of sterile pyuria ( numbers of white cells but sterile on standard culture)
Infection related

Non-infection related

TB
Recently treated UTI 
Inadequately treated UTI 
Fastidious culture requirement
Appendicitis, prostatitis, chlamydia Chemical cystitis

Calculi
Renal tract tumour
Papillary necrosis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis

Polycystic kidney
Recent catheter
Pregnancy

SLE
Drugs, eg steroids

_OHCM_10e.indb   296

_OHCM_10e.indb   296

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
297

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Managing UTI
Do not use antibiotics for the treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in non-
pregnant women, men, and adults with catheters.
Non-pregnant women:
  • If three or more symptoms (or one severe) of cystitis, and no vaginal discharge, 
treat empirically with 3-day course of trimethoprim, or nitrofurantoin (if eGFR 
>30).

  • If ﬁ rst-line empirical treatment fails, culture urine and treat according to anti-

biotic sensitivity.

  • In upper UTI, take a urine culture and treat initially with a broad-spectrum antibi-
otic according to local guidelines/sensitivities, eg co-amoxiclav. Hospitalization 
should be considered due to risk of antibiotic resistance. Avoid nitrofurantoin as 
it does not achieve eff ective concentrations in the blood.

Pregnant women:
Get expert help: UTI in pregnancy is associated with preterm delivery and intrau-
terine growth restriction. Asymptomatic bacteriuria should be conﬁ rmed on a 
second sample. Treat with an antibiotic. Refer to local guidance advice for antibi-
otic choice (avoid ciproﬂ oxacin, trimethoprim in 1st trimester, nitrofurantoin in 3rd 
trimester). Conﬁ rm eradication.
Men:
  • Treat lower UTI with a 7-day course of trimethoprim or nitrofurantoin (if eGFR >30).
  • If symptoms suggest prostatitis (pain in pelvis, genitals, lower back, buttocks) 
consider a longer (4-week) course of a ﬂ uoroquinolone (eg ciproﬂ oxacin) due to 
ability to penetrate prostatic ﬂ uid.

  • If upper or recurrent UTI, refer for urological investigation.
Catheterized patients:
  • All catheterized patients are bacteriuric. Send MSU only if symptomatic. Symp-
toms of UTI may be non-speciﬁ c/atypical. Possible symptoms include fever, ﬂ ank/
suprapubic pain, change in voiding pattern, vomiting, confusion, sepsis.

  • Change long-term catheter before starting an antibiotic.
  • Refer to local guidelines for initial antibiotic choice. Where possible use a narrow-

spectrum antibiotic according to culture sensitivity.

Urinary tract tuberculosis
  • A cause of sterile pyuria: dysuria, frequency, suprapubic pain but negative stand-
ard culture. Ask about malaise, fever, night sweats, weight loss, back/ﬂ ank pain, 
visible haematuria (p393).

  • Can also cause an interstitial nephritis (p318) and renal amyloidosis (p315). Glo-

merulonephritis is rare.

  • Diagnose by microscopy with acid-fast techniques and mycobacterial culture of 

an early morning MSU and/or urinary tract tissue.

  • Treat with rifampicin and isoniazid for 6 months in conjunction with pyrazina-

mide and ethambutol for 2 months (see p394). 

The ‘Piss Prophets’

Beware the fallacies, deceit and juggling of the piss-pot science used by 
all those who pretend knowledge of diseases by the urine. Thomas Brian, 1655.
Medieval texts1 give the following maxims regarding urinary change and disease:
  • White or straw coloured urine = weak and cold liver and stomach
  • Foamy urine = eructation (belching)
  • Light coloured, turbid urine = mucus
  • Lead circle on thin urine = pathological melancholy
  • Bubbles on the surface = disease of the head
  • Watery urine = love sickness
  • Swampy, black, stinking urine = fatal
  • Lead coloured urine = a disintegrating uterus
  • Reddish, cloudy urine with bubbles = asthma or an irregular heart beat.

1  Uroscopy in Early Modern Europe by Michael Stolberg, Routledge, 2016, p53–6.

_OHCM_10e.indb   297

_OHCM_10e.indb   297

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
298

Acute kidney injury (AKI): a clinical approach

Deﬁ nition
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a syndrome of decreased renal function, measured by 
serum creatinine or urine output, occurring over hours–days. It includes diff erent 
aetiologies and may be multifactorial.

Diff erent deﬁ nitions of AKI exist. In 2012, there was an attempt to amalgamate 
diff erent diagnostic criteria into a single deﬁ nition and staging system. The Kidney 
Diseases: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines2 deﬁ ne AKI as:
  • rise in creatinine >26μmol/L within 48h.
  • rise in creatinine >1.5 ≈ baseline (ie before the AKI) within 7 days.
  • urine output <0.5mL/kg/h for >6 consecutive hours.
The severity of AKI is then staged according to the highest creatinine rise or longest 
period/severity of oliguria (table 7.3).
Table 7.3  KDIGO staging system for AKI
Stage
1

Urine output
<0.5mL/kg/h for 6–12h

Serum creatinine
>26.5μmol/L (0.3mg/dL) or
1.5–1.9 ≈ baseline
2.0–2.9 ≈ baseline
>353.6μmol/L (4.0mg/dL) or
>3.0 ≈ baseline or
renal replacement therapy

<0.5mL/kg/h for >12h
<0.3mL/kg/h for >24h or
anuria for >12h

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

2
3

Although there are limitations to the use of serum creatinine, including the eff ects 
of muscle mass and dilution, no other biomarker has been able to supersede it (yet). 
The clinical approach to AKI is shown in ﬁ g 7.3.3
Epidemiology
AKI is common, occurring in up to 18% of hospital patients and ~50% of ICU patients. 
Risk factors for  AKI include pre-existing  CKD, age, male sex, and comorbidity (DM, 
cardiovascular disease, malignancy, chronic liver disease, complex surgery).
Causes
Commonest causes:

1      Sepsis.
2      Major surgery.
3      Cardiogenic shock.
4      Other hypovolaemia.
5      Drugs.
6      Hepatorenal syndrome.
7      Obstruction.

Aetiology can be divided according to site (table 7.4) as:
  • pre-renal: perfusion to the kidney.
  • renal: intrinsic renal disease.
  • post-renal: obstruction to urine.

Table 7.4  Aetiology of AKI
Pathology
Where?
Vascular volume
Pre-renal
Cardiac output
Systemic vasodilation
Renal vasoconstriction
Glomerular (pp310–13)

Renal

Interstitial (p318)
Vessels (pp314–5)
Post-renal Within renal tract

Extrinsic compression

Example
Haemorrhage, D&V, burns, pancreatitis
Cardiogenic shock, MI
Sepsis, drugs
NSAIDs, ACE-i, ARB, hepatorenal syndrome
Glomerulonephritis, ATN (prolonged renal hypo-
perfusion causing intrinsic renal damage)
Drug reaction, infection, inﬁ ltration (eg sarcoid)
Vasculitis, HUS, TTP, DIC 
Stone, renal tract malignancy, stricture, clot
Pelvic malignancy, prostatic hypertrophy, retro-
peritoneal ﬁ brosis

_OHCM_10e.indb   298

_OHCM_10e.indb   298

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
  AKI

NEWS (see p892, ﬁ g A1)
Consider critical care referral

Pulmonary oedema? Early referral to renal as may 
need dialysis (see below)

Urgent K+ (venous blood gas)
Treat if >6.5mmol/L or any ECG changes (p301)

Treat hypovolaemia
Bolus ﬂ uid 250–500mL (p300) until volume replete
If 2L given without response, seek expert help 
(renal/HDU/ITU) 

Is there a 
life-threatening 
complication?

Examine
Heart rate, BP, 
JVP, capillary 
reﬁ ll, palpate for 
bladder

Monitor

  • Fluid balance—consider urinary catheter and hourly urine output
  • K+—check response to treatment and at least daily until creatinine falls
  • Observations—minimum every 4 hours
  • Lactate if signs of sepsis
  • Daily creatinine until  (lags ~24 hours behind clinical response) 

299

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Investigate
  • Urine dipstick (pre-catheter) and quantiﬁ cation of any proteinuria. Haematuria/

proteinuria may suggest intrinsic renal disease

  • USS within 24 hours (unless cause obvious or AKI improving). Small kidneys 

(<9cm) suggest CKD. Asymmetry may suggest renal vascular disease

  • Check liver function (hepatorenal)
  • Check platelets—if low need blood ﬁ lm to check for haemolysis (HUS/TTP)
  • Investigate for intrinsic renal disease if indicated: immunoglobulins, paraprotein, 

complement, autoantibodies (ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM)

Support

  • Treat sepsis (p792)
  • Stop nephrotoxic medication—NSAIDS, ACE-i, ARB, aminoglycosides
  • Stop drugs that may complications: diuretics (especially K+-sparing), met-

formin, antihypertensives

  • Check all drug dosages are appropriate for renal impairment
  • Consider gastroprotection (H2 antagonist, PPI) and nutritional support
  • Avoid radiological contrast (or risk: p319).

Fig 7.3  The clinical approach to AKI.3

Referring to the renal team
Request that advice/review is necessary due to:
  • AKI not responding to treatment
  • AKI with complications: K+, acidosis, ﬂ uid overload
  • stage 3 AKI (table 7.3)
  • AKI with diffi  cult ﬂ uid balance (eg hypoalbuminaemia, heart failure, pregnancy)
  • AKI due to possible intrinsic renal disease (table 7.4)
  • AKI with hypertension.
Know: Creatinine trend and pre-morbid result if available, K+, bicarbonate/lactate, 
Hb, platelet count (+ﬁ lm), urine dipstick (before catheter), clinical observations 
(NEWS) since admission, ﬂ uid input/output, examination ﬁ ndings (hypo/hypervol-
aemia), USS result, comorbidity (eg DM), drugs given (what? when? nephrotoxic?).

_OHCM_10e.indb   299

_OHCM_10e.indb   299

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
300

Acute kidney injury (AKI): management

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Management of AKI requires diagnosis and treatment of the underlying aetiology:
  • Pre-renal: correct volume depletion and/or renal perfusion via circulatory/cardiac 

support, treat any underlying sepsis.

  • Renal: refer for likely biopsy and specialist treatment of intrinsic renal disease.
  • Post-renal: catheter, nephrostomy, or urological intervention.
Common to all aetiologies of AKI is the need to manage ﬂ uid balance, acidosis, hyper-
kalaemia, and the timely recognition of those who may require renal replacement.

Fluid balance
Volume status:
  • Hypovolaemia: BP, urine volume, non-visible JVP, poor tissue turgor, pulse, daily 

weight loss.

  • Fluid overload: BP, JVP, lung crepitations, peripheral oedema, gallop rhythm.
Hypotension may be relative in old age, vascular stiff ness, untreated BP.
JVP does not reﬂ ect intravascular volume if right-sided heart disease/failure.
BP, skin turgor, capillary reﬁ ll changes may be late—do not wait for them.
Hypovolaemia, ﬂ uid resuscitation:
  • If hypovolaemic, renal perfusion will improve with volume replacement.4
  • Care in cardiac disease (renal perfusion despite adequate circulating volume) 

and sepsis/third-spacing (extravascular volume).

  • Dynamic assessment is essential: examine before and after all ﬂ uid given to 

ensure an adequate response and to reduce the risk of ﬂ uid overload.
1      Give 500mL crystalloid over 15 min.
2      Reassess ﬂ uid state. Get expert help if unsure or if patient remains shocked.
3      Further boluses of 250–500mL crystalloid with clinical review after each.
4      Stop when euvolaemic or seek expert help when 2L given.

Which  crystalloid? Any crystalloid can be used (follow local guidelines).  0.9% 
(‘normal’)  saline  is  non-buff ered,  contains  chloride,  and  may  cause  hyperchlo-
raemic acidosis. ‘Balanced’ or buff ered crystalloids include Hartmann’s, Ringer’s 
lactate, and Plasma-Lyte®. Because they are ‘balanced’ they are often used prefer-
entially. However, they contain 4–5mmol/L of K+ so caution if K+and oligo/anuria.
What about colloid? Blood components should be used in resuscitation due to 
haemorrhage. Human albumin solutions may be given only under specialist advice 
in hepatorenal syndrome and as second line to crystalloids in septic shock.
Hypervolaemia, ﬂ uid overload:
Occurs due to aggressive ﬂ uid resuscitation, oliguria, and in sepsis due to capillary 
permeability. Monitor weight daily in patients receiving IV ﬂ uids. Treat with:
  • Oxygen supplementation if required.
  • Fluid restriction. Consider oral and IV volumes. Give antibiotics in minimal ﬂ uid 

and consider concentrated nutritional support preparations.

  • Diuretics. Only in symptomatic ﬂ uid overload. They are ineff ective and poten-

tially harmful if used to treat oliguria without ﬂ uid overload.

  • Renal replacement therapy (p306). AKI with ﬂ uid overload and oligo/anuria needs 

urgent referral to renal/critical care.

Acidosis
  • Mild = pH 7.30–7.36 (~bicarbonate >20mmol/L).
  • Moderate = pH 7.20–7.29 (~bicarbonate 10–19mmol/L).
  • Severe = pH <7.2 (~bicarbonate <10mmol/L): refer to renal/critical care.
Treatment is of the underlying disorder which will stop acid production. Where 
the eff ect of treatment may be delayed, acidosis will persist and renal replace-
ment may be indicated (p306).

Medical management of acidosis is controversial. Giving sodium bicarbonate will 
generate CO2. Adequate ventilation is therefore needed to prevent respiratory acido-
sis worsening the clinical picture. Sodium bicarbonate also represents a sodium and 
a volume load which can precipitate ﬂ uid overload in the vulnerable patient.

_OHCM_10e.indb   300

_OHCM_10e.indb   300

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
301

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Hyperkalaemia

Fig 7.4  ECG showing severe hyperkalaemia; note broadening of QRS complexes.
ECG changes: In order: tall ‘tented’ T waves; increased PR interval; small or absent 
P wave; widened QRS complex (ﬁ g 7.4); ‘sine wave’ pattern; asystole. There is con-
siderable inter-individual susceptibility.
Don’t wait for a lab result: use the blood gas analyser.
Treat5 K+ >6.5mmol/L or any with ECG changes (ECG for all K+ >6.0mmol/L):

1      10mL of 10% calcium chloride2 (or 30mL of 10% calcium gluconate) IV via a 
big vein over 5–10min, repeated if necessary and if ECG changes persist. This is 
cardioprotective (for 30–60min) but does not treat K+ level.

2      Intravenous insulin (10u soluble insulin) in 25g glucose (50mL of 50% or 125mL 
of 20% glucose). Insulin stimulates intracellular uptake of K+, lowering serum 
K+  by  0.65–1.0mmol/L  over  30–60min.  Monitor  hourly  for  hypoglycaemia  (in 
11–75% of treated patients) which may be delayed in renal impairment (up to 
6 hours after infusion).

3      Salbutamol also causes an intracellular K+ shift but high doses are required 
(10–20mg via nebulizer) and tachycardia can limit use (10mg dose in IHD, avoid 
in tachyarrhythmias).

4      Deﬁ nitive treatment requires K+ removal. If the underlying pathology cannot 
be corrected renal replacement may be indicated. Safe transfer to an off site 
renal unit requires K+ <6.5mmol/L—discuss with renal team and critical care.
Use of intravenous sodium bicarbonate is controversial with insuffi  cient evidence 
that it has any additional beneﬁ t over the treatment steps listed here. There is a 
risk of both sodium and ﬂ uid overload. Bolus doses of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate 
should not be used.

Renal replacement therapy (RRT) in AKI
RRT options in  AKI include haemodialysis and haemoﬁ ltration (p306). Peritoneal 
dialysis is rare for AKI in adults and in high-income countries but can be used.
Possible indications for renal replacement therapy:
  • Fluid overload unresponsive to medical treatment.
  • Severe/prolonged acidosis.
  • Recurrent/persistent hyperkalaemia despite medical treatment.
  • Uraemia eg pericarditis, encephalopathy (more common in CKD).
The decision to start RRT should be individualized, aiming to provide organ support 
and prevent complications, rather than waiting for them to occur. The complexity 
of AKI and variation in thresholds for starting RRT prevent robust meta-analysis. 
Fluid overload is likely to be an important predictor of worse outcome.
Possible complications of RRT: Risks of dialysis catheter insertion and mainte-
nance, procedural hypotension, bleeding due to the requirement for anticoagula-
tion, altered nutrition and drug clearance.

2  Calcium  chloride  contains  3x  calcium  than  the  same  volume  of  gluconate.  Concern  exists  about  the 
bioavailability of calcium gluconate. Both salts carry a risk of tissue necrosis with extravasation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   301

_OHCM_10e.indb   301

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
302

Chronic kidney disease (CKD)

Deﬁ nition Abnormal kidney structure or function, present for >3 months, with im-
plications for health.6
Classiﬁ cation Based on GFR category (table 7.5), the presence of albuminuria as 
a marker of kidney damage (table 7.6), and the cause of kidney disease (table 7.7).
(Problems using formula to grade renal disease by eGFR p669).
Table 7.5  Classiﬁ cation of CKD by GFR (mL/min/1.73m2)
Notes
Category GFR 
>90
Only CKD if other evidence of kidney damage: protein/haematuria, 
G1
pathology on biopsy/imaging, tubule disorder, transplant
60–89
45–59
Mild–moderate GFR
30–44
Moderate–severe GFR
15–29
Severe GFR
<15
Kidney failure

G3b

G3a

G4

G2

G5

Table 7.6  Classiﬁ cation of CKD by albuminuria
Category Albumin excretion (mg/24h) Albumin:creatinine ratio (A:CR) (mg/mmol)
A1

A2

A3

<30
30–300
>300

<3
3–30
>30

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Renal pathology

Drugs, toxins, sarcoid
Heart failure, TTP
Alport syndrome, Fabry disease
Rejection, calcineurin toxicity

Table 7.7  Classiﬁ cation of CKD based on underlying disease
Examples
Primary renal disease
Systemic disease
Minimal change, membranous Diabetes, amyloid
UTI, pyelonephritis, stones
Renal limited vasculitis
Renal dysplasia
Recurrence of renal disease

Glomerular
Tubulointerstitial
Blood ﬂ ow/vessels
Cystic/congenital
Transplant
The most common causes of CKD in the UK are diabetes (24%), glomerulonephritis 
(13%), and BP/renovascular disease (11%).7
Prognosis GFR and albuminuria are independently associated with a higher risk of:
  • all-cause mortality
  • cardiovascular mortality
  • progressive kidney disease and kidney failure
  • AKI.
Patients with CKD are much more likely to die of CVD than to need renal replacement 
therapy. The risk of adverse outcome in CKD can be represented as a ‘heat map’ ac-
cording to GFR and albuminuria categories (ﬁ g 7.5).

Composite ranking for
relative risks by GFR
and albuminaria
(KDIGO 2009)

Albuminuria stages,
description and range (mg/g)
A3
A2 
A1 
Very high and
Optimal and
nephrotic
high–normal

High

<10 

10–29 

30–
299

300–
1999

> 2000

GFR
stages,
description
and range
(ml/min
per
1.73 m2)

G1

High and
optimal

G2

Mild

G3a

G3b

Mild–
moderate
Moderate–
severe

G4

G5

Severe
Kidney
failure

>105

90–104

75–89

60–74

45–59

30–44

15–29

<15

Low risk

Moderate risk

High risk

Very high risk

Extrapolated data

Fig 7.5  Composite risk of adverse outcome by GFR and albuminuria.

Reprinted from Kidney International, 80, AS Levey et al., Chronic kidney disease: 
deﬁ nition, classiﬁ cation, and prognosis, 17–28, 2011, with permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   302

_OHCM_10e.indb   302

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
303

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

The patient with CKD: a clinical approach
History
  • Does the patient really have CKD? Does the eGFR reﬂ ect the true GFR (p669)? Is 
the eGFR corrected for ethnicity/drugs (eg trimethoprim alters creatinine con-
centration but not GFR)? Evidence of chronicity, ie >3 months—is there a previous 
creatinine on record?

  • Possible cause: Ask about previous UTI, lower urinary tract symptoms, PMH of 
BP, DM, IHD,  systemic  disorder,  renal  colic.  Check  drug  history  including  when 
medications  started.  Family  history  including  renal  disease  and  subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Systems review: look out for more than is immediately obvious, 
consider rare causes, ask about eyes, skin, joints, ask about symptoms suggestive 
of systemic disorder (‘When did you last feel well?’) and malignancy.

  • Current state: Patients may have symptomatic CKD if GFR <30. Includes symp-
toms of ﬂ uid overload (SOB, peripheral oedema), anorexia, nausea, vomiting, rest-
less legs, fatigue, weakness, pruritus, bone pain, amenorrhoea, impotence.

Examination
  • Periphery: Peripheral oedema. Signs of peripheral vascular disease or neuropa-
thy. A vasculitic rash. Gouty tophi. Joint disease. Arteriovenous ﬁ stula (thrill, 
bruit, recently needling?). Signs of immunosuppression: bruising from steroids, 
skin malignancy. Uraemic ﬂ ap/encephalopathy if GFR <15.

  • Face:  Anaemia,  xanthelasma,  yellow  tinge  (uraemia),  jaundice  (hepatorenal), 
gum hypertrophy (ciclosporin), Cushingoid (steroids), periorbital oedema (ne-
phrotic syndrome), taut skin/telangiectasia (scleroderma), facial lipodystrophy 
(glomerulonephritis).

  • Neck: JVP for ﬂ uid state, tunnelled line (if removed, look for small scar over in-
ternal jugular, and a larger scar in ‘breast pocket’ area), scar from parathyroid-
ectomy, lymphadenopathy.

  • Cardiovascular:  BP,  sternotomy,  cardiomegaly,  stigmata  of  endocarditis.  If 
right-sided heart failure/tricuspid regurgitation, JVP does not reﬂ ect ﬂ uid state.

  • Respiratory: Pulmonary oedema or eff usion.
  • Abdomen: PD catheter or scars from previous catheter (small scars just below 
umbilicus and to side of midline), signs of previous transplant (scar, palpable 
graft), ballotable polycystic kidneys ± palpable liver.

Investigation
  • Blood: U&E (compare with previous), Hb (normochromic, normocytic anaemia), 
glucose (DM), Ca2+, PO4
3 Ω, PTH (renal osteodystrophy). Directed investigation 
of  intrinsic  renal  disease:  ANA,  ANCA,  antiphospholipid  antibodies,  paraprotein, 
complement, cryoglobulin, anti-GBM, hepatitis serology, anti-PLA2R (membranous 
nephropathy). Note: ESR is not helpful as  in CKD and proteinuric states.

  • Urine: Dipstick, MC&S, A:CR or P:CR (p294), Bence Jones.
  • Imaging: USS for size, symmetry, anatomy, corticomedullary diff erentiation, and 
to exclude obstruction. In CKD kidneys may be small (<9cm) except in inﬁ ltrative 
disorders (amyloid, myeloma), APKD, and DM. If asymmetrical consider renovas-
cular disease. Scarring may be seen on USS but isotope scans are more sensitive.
  • Histology: Consider renal biopsy (p310) in progressive disease, nephrotic syn-
drome, systemic disease, AKI without recovery. Biopsy is unlikely to change treat-
ment if GFR stable and P:CR <150. DM with neuropathy/retinopathy may not need 
biopsy unless atypical, ie nephrotic, haematuria, other systemic symptoms. 

Monitoring renal function in CKD
GFR and albuminuria should be monitored at least annually, according to risk. If 
high risk, monitor every 6 months (ﬁ g 7.5, orange), if very high risk, monitor at 
least every 3–4 months (ﬁ g 7.5, red). Small ﬂ uctuations are common but a drop in 
eGFR stage with eGFR ≥ 25% is signiﬁ cant. Rapid progression is eGFR >5/yr.
Risk factors for decline: BP, DM, metabolic disturbance, volume depletion, infec-
tion, NSAIDs, smoking. All CKD has risk of superimposed AKI and needs monitoring 
and prompt treatment during intercurrent illness. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   303

_OHCM_10e.indb   303

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
304

Chronic kidney disease (CKD): management

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

CKD encompasses a range of disease from mild disease without progression to ad-
vanced, symptomatic disease requiring renal replacement.
Management of CKD6,8 requires:

1      Appropriate referral to nephrology.
2      Treatment to slow renal disease progression.
3      Treatment of renal complications of CKD.
4      Treatment of other complications of CKD.
5      Preparation for renal replacement therapy (dialysis/transplantation) (p306).

Referral to nephrology
Consider referral for:
  • stage G4 and G5 CKD (table 7.5)
  • moderate proteinuria A:CR >70mg/mmol unless due to DM and already treated
  • proteinuria A:CR >30mg/mmol with haematuria
  • declining eGFR:

  • eGFR by ≥25% + GFR category (table 7.5)
  • sustained eGFR ≥15% within 12 months

  • BP poorly controlled despite ≥4 antihypertensive drugs at therapeutic dose
  • known or suspected rare or genetic cause of CKD.
Treatment to slow renal disease progression
BP: Target systolic BP is <140mmHg (range 120–139mmHg) and diastolic <90mmHg. 
If  DM  or  A:CR >70  then  systolic  target  is  <130mmHg  (range  120–129)  and  diastolic 
<80mmHg.
Renin–angiotensin  system: Off er treatment with a renin–angiotensin system an-
tagonist (ACE-i, ARB) to:
  • DM and A:CR >3mg/mmol.
  • Hypertension and A:CR >30mg/mmol.
  • Any CKD with A:CR >70mg/mmol.
Do not combine renin–angiotensinsin antagonists due to risk of hyperkalaemia and 
hypotension. Check K+ and renal function prior to, and 1–2 weeks after, starting treat-
ment or changing dose. Stop if K+ >6mmol/L, eGFR >25%, or creatinine >30%: ex-
clude other possible causes and consider a lower dose.
Glycaemic  control:  Target  HbA1C  of  ~53mmol/mol  (7.0%)  unless  risk  of  hypo-
glycaemia, comorbidity or limited life expectancy.
Lifestyle: Off er advice about exercise, healthy weight, and smoking cessation. Salt 
intake should be reduced to <2g of sodium/day (=<5g sodium chloride/day).
Treatment of renal complications of CKD
Anaemia: Check Hb when eGFR <60. Investigate (especially if anaemic with eGFR >30) 
and treat other deﬁ ciencies: iron (hypochromic red cells >6%, transferrin saturation 
<20%, ferritin <100), B12, and folate. Do not miss chronic blood loss. Iron therapy may 
need to be given IV. Consider treatment with an erythropoietic stimulating agent 
(ESA, ‘Epo’) if Hb <110g/L and likely to beneﬁ t in terms of function and quality of 
life. Pure red cell aplasia is a very rare, severe complication of ESA treatment due to 
anti-erythropoietin antibodies and usually causes Hb <60g/L: exclude more common 
causes of anaemia ﬁ rst.
Acidosis: Consider sodium bicarbonate supplements for patients with eGFR <30 and 
low  serum  bicarbonate  (<20mmol/L).  Caution  in  patients  with  hypertension  and 
ﬂ uid overload due to sodium component.
Oedema: Restrict ﬂ uid and sodium intake. High doses of loop diuretics may be need-
ed. Combination of a loop and thiazide diuretic can have a powerful eff ect: distal 
tubule sodium excretion (and its inhibition with a thiazide) is more signiﬁ cant when 
already treated with a loop diuretic (ﬁ g 7.13). Diuretic treatment should only be given 
with careful monitoring of ﬂ uid state and renal function.

_OHCM_10e.indb   304

_OHCM_10e.indb   304

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
305

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

CKD  bone-mineral  disorders:  CKD  causes    in  serum  phosphate  and  reduced  hy-
droxlyation of vitamin D by the kidney. Measure calcium, phosphate, ALP, PTH, and 
25-OH vit D if eGFR <30.
  • Treat if phosphate >1.5mmol/L (>1.7mmol/L if RRT) with dietary restriction ± phos-
phate binders. The use of binders which do not contain calcium may be beneﬁ cial 
in preventing vascular calciﬁ cation.

  • Give vitamin D supplements (colecalciferol, ergocalciferol) if deﬁ cient. If PTH per-
sists or is increasing, treat with an activated vit D analogue eg 1-calcidol or calci-
triol. Paricalcitol suppresses PTH with less eff ect on gut absorption of calcium and 
phosphate and is less likely to cause calcium/phosphate.

Restless  legs/cramps:  Exclude  iron  deﬁ ciency  as  a  possible  exacerbating  factor. 
Give sleep hygiene advice. Treatment for severe cases with gabapentin/pregabalin/
dopamine agonists is off  licence and may be complicated by side-eff ects (falls, cogni-
tive impairment, impulse-control disorder).
Diet: Expert dietary advice should be available regarding protein intake, K+ if hyper-
kalaemic, and phosphate restriction (eg dairy products).
Treatment of other complications of CKD
Cardiovascular disease: CKD confers risk of cardiovascular disease due to BP, vas-
cular stiff ness, inﬂ ammation, oxidative stress, and abnormal endothelial function (CV 
risk often higher than the risk of kidney failure).
  • Antiplatelets (low-dose aspirin) for CKD at risk for atherosclerotic events unless 

bleeding risk outweighs beneﬁ t (mortality beneﬁ t unclear in CKD).

  • Atorvastatin 20mg (and higher if GFR >30) for primary and secondary prevention 

of cardiovascular disease.

  • CKD should not aff ect treatment for heart failure but monitoring of GFR and K+.
  • GFR <60 may aff ect troponin and BNP values. Interpret results cautiously with con-

sideration for the GFR.

Preparation for renal replacement therapy (RRT)
Planning for  RRT should begin in progressive  CKD when the risk of renal failure is 
10–20% within a year. Referral to nephrology less than 1 year before RRT is required 
is considered a late referral.

All  suitable  patients  should  be  listed  for  a  deceased  donor  transplantation 
6 months before the anticipated start of RRT. All suitable patients should be informed 
about the advantages of a pre-emptive living kidney transplant and eff orts made to 
ﬁ nd a donor (p308).

Prescribing in CKD
Never prescribe in renal failure before checking how administration should be 
altered due to a GFR. This will be determined largely by the extent to which a 
drug  is  renally  excreted.  This  is  signiﬁ cant  for  aminoglycosides,  penicillins, 
cephalo sporins, heparin, lithium, opiates, and digoxin. Loading doses should not 
be changed.

If precision is required for dosing (eg chemotherapy) then GFR should not be 

estimated from creatinine: a cystatin C or direct measure of GFR should be used.
If the patient is receiving renal replacement (haemoﬁ ltration, peritoneal or hae-
modialysis), dose modiﬁ cation depends on the extent to which a drug is cleared 
from the circulation by dialysis/ﬁ ltration.

The best prescribing guide to consult is the Renal Drug Database/Handbook 
(www.renaldrugdatabase.com), an invaluable resource detailing dose modiﬁ cation in 
renal failure and in renal replacement for almost any drug you could wish to use. 
All hospitals should have access: speak to your pharmacist.

_OHCM_10e.indb   305

_OHCM_10e.indb   305

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
306

R enal replacement therapy (RRT): dialysis and ﬁ ltration

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Blood

Dialysate

Fluid 
in

Blood 
in

Blood
returned

Waste
removed

Fig 7.6  Haemodialysis.

Long-term dialysis is started when it is necessary to manage one or more symptoms 
of renal failure including:
  • inability to control volume status, including pulmonary oedema
  • inability to control blood pressure
  • serositis
  • acid–base or electrolyte abnormalities
  • pruritus
  • nausea/vomiting/deterioration in nutritional status
  • cognitive impairment.
RRT is a misnomer for dialysis: renal function is not replaced, rather there is provi-
sion of just enough clearance to ameliorate the symptoms of kidney failure.
GFR at commencement of dialysis is usually ~5–10. When transplantation is awaited 
or not possible, there are two main options: haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Haemodialysis  (HD)  (ﬁ g  7.6)  Blood  is 
passed over a semi-permeable membrane 
against dialysis ﬂ uid ﬂ owing in the oppo-
site  direction.  Diff usion  of  solutes  occurs 
down  the  concentration  gradient.  A  hy-
drostatic gradient is used to clear excess 
ﬂ uid as required (ultraﬁ ltration). Access is 
preferentially via an arteriovenous ﬁ stula 
which provides blood ﬂ ow and longevity. 
This should be created prior to need for RRT 
to avoid the infection risk associated with central venous dialysis catheters. HD is 
needed 3 times/week or more. Daily HD increases the ‘dose’ and improves outcomes. 
Home HD should be off ered to all suitable patients. Problems: Access (arteriovenous 
ﬁ stula: thrombosis, stenosis, steal syndrome; tunnelled venous line: infection, block-
age, recirculation of blood), dialysis dysequilibrium (between cerebral and blood sol-
utes leading to cerebral oedema  start HD gradually), hypotension, time consuming.
Peritoneal  dialysis  (PD)  Uses  the  peritoneum  as  a  semi-permeable  membrane. 
A catheter is inserted into the peritoneal cavity and ﬂ uid infused. Solutes diff use 
slowly across. Ultraﬁ ltration is achieved by adding osmotic agents (glucose, glu-
cose polymers) to the ﬂ uid. It is a continuous process with intermittent drainage 
and reﬁ lling of the peritoneal cavity, performed at home. Problems: Catheter site 
infection, PD peritonitis, hernia, loss of membrane function over time.
Haemoﬁ ltration  (ﬁ g  7.7)  Water  cleared 
by positive pressure, dragging solutes into 
the waste by convection. The ultraﬁ ltrate 
(waste)  is  replaced  with  an  appropriate 
volume of (‘clean’) ﬂ uid either before (pre-
dilution) or after (post-dilution) the mem-
brane. Haemodynamic instability so used 
in  critical  care  when  HD not possible due 
to  BP. Not  used  for  chronic  RRT unless  in 
combination with  HD (haemodiaﬁ ltration) 
for haemodynamic stability and middle molecule clearance, eg 2-microglobulin.
Complications of RRT Annual mortality is signiﬁ cant, mostly due to cardiovascu-
lar disease: BP, calcium/phosphate dysregulation, vascular stiff ness, inﬂ ammation, 
oxidative stress, abnormal endothelial function. Protein-calorie malnutrition: In-
creases  morbidity  and  mortality.  Renal  bone  disease:  High  bone  turnover,  renal 
osteodystrophy, osteitis ﬁ brosa. Infection: Uraemia causes granulocyte and T-cell 
dysfunction with sepsis-related mortality. Amyloid: 2-microglobulin accumulates 
in long–term dialysis causing carpal tunnel syndrome, arthralgia, visceral eff ects.
Conservative management is for those who opt not to receive RRT due to lack of 
beneﬁ t on quality or quantity of life. Focus is on preserving residual renal function, 
symptom control, and advanced planning with patient and family for end-of-life care.

Fig 7.7  Haemoﬁ ltration.

Blood
returned

Pre-
dilution

Post
dilution

Blood 
in

Waste out

Dialysate

Blood

_OHCM_10e.indb   306

_OHCM_10e.indb   306

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
When a patient on dialysis presents...

1      Do they need dialysis now? Examine for ﬂ uid overload and check K+. If on PD 
are they well enough to perform it themselves? Refer urgently to renal on-call.
2      When will they need dialysis? When are they due to dialyse next? Weigh them. 
All patients on dialysis have a target weight at which they are considered 
euvolaemic. How much are they above it? Do they have any useful urine output 
(ie that may help them lose volume/K+)? Refer to renal in a timely manner.
3      What is your diagnosis? History and examination as for any other patient. Do 
not measure  BP on ﬁ stula arm. Remember risk for  CVD but troponin has 
speciﬁ city in ESRF.

4      Treat. Remember to dose adjust for renal failure—includes antibiotics, opi-
ates, insulin, and low-molecular-weight heparin (see www.renaldrugdatabase.com, 
p305). Care with ﬂ uid replacement in sepsis: be guided by clinical examination 
and target weight. If unsure get expert help. If volume depleted give a 250mL 
bolus  of  (non-K+  containing)  crystalloid  over  15min  with  close  observation. 
Avoid maintenance ﬂ uids in those who normally have a ﬂ uid restriction. Do 
not use a dialysis line or ﬁ stula for IV access—if a cannula is necessary, 
preferentially use the back of the hand, save other vessels for future ﬁ stulas.
5      Surgery  needs  senior  anaesthetic  and  renal  input.  Aim  for  pre-op  K+ 
<5.5mmol/L  (<5.0mmol/L  if  major  surgery  with  risk  of  tissue  breakdown/
haemolysis). Check K+ urgently post-op (venous gas in recovery). In elective 
surgery, plan dialysis provision pre- and post-op. 

307

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Warning: there is no normal
Ten years is a long time. For those ten years, or just over 3,560 times, I attached 
myself to a peritoneal dialysis machine and underwent nine hours and ﬁ fty min-
utes of nightly therapy. I subsequently learned to do a lot of crosswords and read 
a ridiculous amount of books. In ten years I had just three incidents: an inguinal 
hernia due to thinking that I could move a sofa (I could not), a parathyroidectomy 
(my knees were much happier afterwards), and one unfortunate bout of peritoni-
tis (once was enough). Statistically speaking, I am an anomaly: the ‘average’ life 
span of a peritoneal dialysis patient is four years.

Admittedly, I did not initially cope well with needing to be on dialysis. After hav-
ing lived successfully with a transplant, a return to dialysis felt like failure. I did not 
want the hassle of treatment. I did not want piles of boxes cluttering up our home. 
Mostly, I did not want a PD catheter jutting out of my belly. But what I originally 
believed to be unacceptable, gradually became tolerable. This took time. It took 
care and support. It took experiencing relative health, and seeing that dialysis life, 
although diff erent to existing with a transplant, could be lived well.

Natasha Boone , author and illustrator, www.normalnotnormal.com; www.natashaboone.com

The man in a red canoe who saved a million lives
Mostly we commute to work each day driven by motives we would rather not 
look at too deeply. But one renal physician used a red canoe to commute each day 
from his houseboat to the hospital. He could have been a very rich man but instead 
Belding Scribner gave his invention away, and continued his modest existence.

He invented the Scribner shunt—a U of teﬂ on connecting an artery to a vein, al-
lowing haemodialysis to be something that could be repeated as often as needed. 
Before Scribner, glass tubes had to be painfully inserted into blood vessels, which 
would  be  damaged  by  the  procedure  so  that  haemodialysis  could  be  done  for 
only a few cycles. Clyde Shields was his ﬁ rst patient in 1960, and said that his ﬁ rst 
treatment ‘took so much of the waste I’d stored up out of me that it was just like 
turning on the light from darkness’. Scribner took something that was 100% fatal 
and turned it into a condition with a 90% survival.

On 19 June 2003, his canoe was found aﬂ oat but empty. And like those ancient 
Indian burial canoes found at Wiskam which have been polished to an unimagina-
ble lustre by the action of the shifting sands around the Island of the Dead, so we 
polish and cherish the image of this man who gave everything away to help others.

_OHCM_10e.indb   307

_OHCM_10e.indb   307

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
308

R enal replacement therapy (RRT): transplantation

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Transplantation (ﬁ gs 7.8, 7.9) should be considered for every patient with, or pro-
gressing towards, stage G5 kidney disease (p302). It is the treatment of choice for 
kidney failure provided risks do not exceed beneﬁ ts. Many will not make the trans-
plant list due to comorbidity or frailty.
Contraindications
  • Absolute: cancer with metastases.
  • Temporary: active infection, HIV with viral replication, unstable CVD.
  • Relative: congestive heart failure, CVD.
Types of graft
  • Living donor: Best graft function and survival, especially if HLA matched.
  • Deceased donor: (See organ donation p13.)

1      Donor after brain death (DBD, heart-beating donor).
2      Expanded criteria donor (ECD) is from an older kidney or from a patient with a 
history of CVA, BP, or CKD. This impacts on the long-term prognosis of the trans-
plant but off ers a better outcome than remaining on dialysis.

3      Donor after cardiac death (DCD, non-heart-beating donor) with risk of delayed 

graft function.

Immunosuppression
A combination of drugs are used. Aim is to use the minimal eff ective dose with the 
lowest drug-related toxicity. Protocol used depends upon the immunological risk of 
the recipient and type of donated kidney.
Monoclonal  antibodies:  Eg  basiliximab,  daclizumab  (selectively  block  activated 
T cells via CD-25), alemtuzumab (T- and B-cell depletion). Used at the time of trans-
plantation (‘induction’). Acute rejection and graft loss, infection risk if non-selective.
Calcineurin  inhibitors: Eg tacrolimus, ciclosporin. These drugs inhibit  T-cell acti-
vation and proliferation. Inter-individual variation and narrow therapeutic index 
mean drug level monitoring is required. Clearance is dependent on cytochrome p450 
isoenzymes so beware of drug interactions including macrolide antibiotics and anti-
fungal drugs. Side eff ects: nephrotoxicity in the graft, modiﬁ cation of CV risk factors: 
BP, cholesterol, NODAT (new-onset diabetes after transplantation).
Antimetabolites: Eg mycophenolic acid (MPA), azathioprine. MPA is now used pref-
erentially due to better prevention of acute rejection and graft survival (not in preg-
nancy, MPA is teratogenic). Side eff ects: anaemia, leucopenia, and GI toxicity.
Glucorticosteroids:  Transcription  of  inﬂ ammatory  cytokines.  First-choice  treat-
ment for acute rejection. Signiﬁ cant side-eff ects (BP, hyperlipidaemia, DM, impaired 
wound healing, osteoporosis, cataracts, skin fragility) have led to protocols with ear-
ly withdrawal of steroids and the use of steroid-free immunosuppression regimens.
Complications
Surgical: Bleed, thrombosis, infection, urinary leaks, lymphocele, hernia.
Delayed graft function: Aff ects up to 40% of grafts, more common in DCD.
Rejection:  Acute  or  chronic.  Acute  is  divided  into  antibody  mediated  (rare  un-
less  known  pre-sensitized  recipient)  or  cellular  (most  common).  Causes  renal 
function,  diagnosed  on  graft  biopsy.  Treatment  with  high-dose  steroids  and 
immunosuppression. Chronic antibody-mediated rejection causes progressive dys-
function of the graft. Most graft loss is now thought to be due to an immune re-
sponse by donor-speciﬁ c antibodies causing damage to the kidney microcirculation. 
Complex pathology and lack of controlled studies mean treatment is not clear. The 
results of monoclonal antibody trials are awaited.
Infection: Risk of all infections. Typically hospital acquired/donor derived in month 
1, opportunistic in months 1–6 (therefore prophylactic treatment for CMV and Pneu-
mocystis jirovecii given), usual spectrum of community-acquired infection after 6–12 
months. Late viral infection should always be considered: eg CMV, HSV.
Malignancy: Up to 25≈ risk of cancer with immunosuppression, particularly skin, 
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD), and gynaecological.
CVD: 3–5≈ risk of premature CVD compared to general population (but ~80% less than 
dialysis). BP, NODAT, rejection, and renal history (uraemic cardiomyopathy) contribute.

_OHCM_10e.indb   308

_OHCM_10e.indb   308

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
309

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Prognosis
Acute rejection <15%, 1-year graft survival >90%. Longer-term graft loss ~4%/year. 
Factors contributing to graft loss:
  • Donor factors: age, comorbidity, living/deceased, DBD/DCD.
  • Rejection.
  • Infection.
  • BP/CVD.
  • Recurrent renal disease in graft.
Most common outcome is death with a functioning transplant (ie transplant ‘out-
lives’ the patient).

When a patient with a renal transplant presents...

1      Discuss everything with the local renal transplant unit: they will be happy to 

advise, review, transfer, and follow-up any renal transplant recipient.

2      What is the eGFR/creatinine? How does that compare with previous results? If 

you do not have any, ask the transplant unit.

3      Examine  for  and  treat  any  reversible  cause  of  AKI.  Fluid  state  assessment 
(p300) is important—if you are unsure, get expert help. Correction of volume 
depletion and treatment of any sepsis should be prompt.

4      Consider viral/opportunistic infections and atypical presentations due to im-

munosuppression, eg CMV, Pneumocystis jirovecii.

5      Do not stop any immunosuppressive medication.If the patient is unable to 
tolerate oral medication then immunosuppression must be given NG or convert 
ed to an IV dose (conversion depends on drug: check with your pharmacist).
6      Check  for  medication  interactions:  macrolide  antibiotics  (erythromycin, 

clarithromycin) can cause calcineurin inhibitor toxicity.

7      Dose all drugs according to renal function: penicillins, cephalosporins, amino-

glycosides, insulin, opiates, and low-molecular-weight heparin.

8      Check with the transplant unit before you give low-molecular-weight heparin 

for VTE prophylaxis: they may want to do a transplant biopsy.

Thank you for life
It feels good to be able to put pen to paper at last and to thank you from the bot-
tom of my heart for the gift of life your daughter has given me and for the kindness 
and compassion you have shown.... I want to say to you that it was a wonderful 
thing that you did as a mother that in your deep sadness showed a caring and giv-
ing heart. I have a much better quality of life now since coming off  dialysis 5 years 
ago. My father died of kidney failure when I was 3 years old. He was someone I 
would have loved to have known. I often think about your daughter, who she was 
and what she was like. Despite not knowing her, I think about her with aff ection 
and much respect. These last years must have been extremely painful for you all. I 
really hope that you, your family and friends have found peace in your lives.
Love Deborah (renal transplant recipient, 1998)

Reproduced from: Royal College of Physicians, 
Department of Health, NHS Blood and Transplant. 
Thank you for life: letters from transplant 
recipients to donors' families. London: RCP, 2010. 
Copyright © 2010 Royal College of Physicians. 
Reproduced with permission.

Fig 7.8  ‘Alive’ by Natasha Boone.

www.natashaboone.com

Fig 7.9  Post-transplant scribble by
Natasha Boone. 

www.natashaboone.com

_OHCM_10e.indb   309

_OHCM_10e.indb   309

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
310

Glomerulonephritis

The term glomerulonephritis (GN) encompasses a number of conditions which:
  • are caused by pathology in the glomerulus
  • present with proteinuria, haematuria, or both
  • are diagnosed on a renal biopsy
  • cause CKD
  • can progress to kidney failure (except minimal change disease).
The names of the diseases come from either the histological appearance (eg membra-
nous glomerulonephritis), or the associated systemic condition (eg lupus nephritis).
Nephrotic or nephritic?
The glomerulonephritides classically present on a spectrum ranging from nephro-
sis (proteinuria due to podocyte pathology, p312), to nephritis (haematuria due to 
inﬂ ammatory damage, p311). This is illustrated in ﬁ g 7.10. However, if a GN causes 
scarring,  then  proteinuria  can  occur.  Proteinuria  can  therefore  complicate  the 
longer-term clinical picture of any GN, including those that are classically ‘nephritic’.

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Fig 7.10  The spectrum of glomerular disease ranging from proteinuria (nephrosis) to haematuria 
(nephritis).
Figure adapted from Turner et al., Oxford Textbook of Clinical Nephrology, 2015, with permission from 
Oxford University Press
Investigation  Assess  damage  and  potential  cause.  Blood:  FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP;  immu-
noglobulins,  electrophoresis,  complement  (C3,  C4);  autoantibodies  (p553):  ANA,  ANCA, 
anti-dsDNA, anti-GBM; blood culture, ASOT, hepatitis serology. Urine: MC&S, Bence Jones 
protein, A:CR/P:CR (p294), RBC casts (p295). Imaging: CXR (pulmonary haemorrhage), renal 
ultrasound (size and anatomy for biopsy). Renal biopsy: Required for diagnosis.
Renal biopsy
Pre-procedure:  BP (<160/95 or according to local protocol), FBC (Hb>9, plt>100), 
clotting (PT and APTT <1.2), G&S. Written informed consent including possible com-
plications: mild back/loin pain, visible haematuria (~5%, usually clears), bleeding, 
need for transfusion (~1%), angiographic intervention (~ ≤ 0.5%). Stop anticoagu-
lants (aspirin 1 week, warfarin to PT <1.2, low-molecular-weight heparin 24h).
Post-procedure: Bed rest for a minimum of 4h. Monitor pulse, BP, symptoms, and 
urine colour. Do not discharge home until macroscopic haematuria settled. Aspirin 
or warfarin can be restarted the next day if procedure uncomplicated.
Result: Examination of glomerular lesions provides GN diagnosis. Includes: pro-
portion of glomeruli involved (focal vs diff use), how much of each glomerulus is 
involved  (segmental  vs  global),  hypercellularity,  sclerosis.  Immunohistology  for 
deposits (Ig, light chains, complement). Electron microscopy for ultrastructure: 
precise  location  of  deposits,  podocyte  appearance.  Also  examines  tubulointer-
stitium (atrophy, ﬁ brosis, inﬂ ammation) and any vessels. 
Management General management as for CKD (pp304–5) including BP control and in-
hibition of renin-angiotensin axis. Speciﬁ c treatment including immunosuppression de-
pends on histological diagnosis, disease severity, disease progression, and comorbidity.

_OHCM_10e.indb   310

_OHCM_10e.indb   310

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
311

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Nephritic glomerulonephritis
Nephritic glomerulonephritides9 include:
IgA nephropathy
Commonest  primary  GN  in  high-income  countries  Presentation:  Asymptomatic 
non-visible haematuria, or episodic visible haematuria which may be ‘synpharyngitic’: 
within 12–72h of infection. BP. Proteinuria usually <1g. Slow, indolent disease: 20–
50% progress to renal failure over 30yr. Worse prognosis in , BP, creatinine, 
proteinuria.  Diagnosis:  Renal  biopsy:  IgA  deposition  in  mesangium.  Treatment: 
ACE-i/ARB reduce proteinuria and protect renal function. Corticosteroids and ﬁ sh oil if 
persistent proteinuria >1g despite 3–6 months of ACE-i/ARB and GFR >50.
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP)
Small vessel vasculitis and systemic variant of IgA nephropathy with IgA deposition 
in skin/joints/gut in addition to kidney. Presentation: Purpuric rash on extensor sur-
faces (typically on the legs, p702), ﬂ itting polyarthritis, abdominal pain (GI bleeding), 
and nephritis. Diagnosis: Usually clinical. Conﬁ rmed with positive IF for IgA and C3 in 
skin. Renal biopsy is identical to IgA nephropathy. Treatment: Renal disease is man-
aged as IgA nephropathy. Steroids may be used for gut involvement.
Post-streptococcal GN
Occurs after a throat (~ 2 weeks) or skin (~3–6 weeks) infection. Streptococcal antigen 
deposits in the glomerulus leading to immune complex formation and inﬂ ammation. 
Presentation: Varies from haematuria to acute nephritis: haematuria, oedema, BP 
and oliguria. Diagnosis: Evidence of streptococcal infection: ASOT, anti-DNAse B. 
Also C3. Treatment: Supportive, antibiotics to clear the nephritogenic bacteria.
Anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) disease
Previously known as Goodpasture’s disease. Rare. Auto-antibodies to type IV colla-
gen which is present in glomerular and alveolar basement membranes. Presenta-
tion: Renal disease (oliguria/anuria, haematuria, AKI, renal failure) and lung disease 
(pulmonary  haemorrhage  in  50–90%    SOB,  haemoptysis).  Dialysis-dependence  at 
presentation and crescents on biopsy predict poor prognosis. Diagnosis: Anti-GBM 
in circulation/kidney (ﬁ g 7.11). Treatment: Plasma exchange, corticosteroids, and 
cyclophosphamide.
Rapidly progressive GN
Any aggressive GN, rapidly progressing to renal failure over days or weeks. Causes 
include small vessel/ANCA vasculitis (p314), lupus nephritis (p314), anti-GBM disease. 
Other GNs may ‘transform’ to become rapidly progressive including IgA, membranous. 
Diagnosis: Breaks in the GBM allow an inﬂ ux of inﬂ ammatory cells so that crescents 
are seen on renal biopsy (may be referred to as crescentic GN) (ﬁ g 7.12). Treatment: 
Corticosteroids  and  cyclophosphamide.  Other  treatments  depend  on  aetiology  eg 
plasma exchange for anti-GBM/ANCA vasculitis, possible role for monoclonal antibodies 
in lupus nephritis.

Fig  7.11  Immunoﬂ uorescence  for  IgG,  show ing 
linear staining characteristic of anti-GBM disease.
Reproduced from Barratt et al., Oxford Desk 
Reference: Nephrology, 2008, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig  7.12  Crescentic  GN:  a  pro liferation  of  epi-
thelial cells and macrophages with rupture of 
Bowman’s capsule.

Reproduced from Turner et al. Oxford Textbook 
of Nephrology, 2016, with permission from Oxford 
University Press. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   311

_OHCM_10e.indb   311

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
312

Nephrotic syndrome

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

If there is oedema, dipstick the urine to avoid missing renal disease.
Deﬁ nition The nephrotic syndrome is a triad of:
  • proteinuria >3g/24h (P:CR >300mg/mmol, A:CR >250mg/mmol, p294)
  • hypoalbuminaemia (usually <30g/L, can be <10g/L)
  • oedema.
Aetiology Primary renal disease or secondary to a systemic disorder.
  • Primary renal disease: Minimal change disease, membranous nephropathy (may 
be  associated  with  underlying  inﬂ ammation/malignancy),  focal  segmental  glo-
merulosclerosis (FSGS), membranoproliferative GN.

  • Secondary causes: DM, lupus nephritis, myeloma, amyloid, pre-eclampsia.
Pathophysiology The ﬁ ltration barrier of the kidney is formed by podocytes, the 
glomerular  basement  membrane  (GBM),  and  endothelial  cells.  Proteinuria  results 
from podocyte pathology: abnormal function in minimal change disease, immune- 
mediated damage in membranous nephropathy, and podocyte injury/death in FSGS; 
or pathology in the GBM/endothelial cell: membranoproliferative GN.
Presentation Generalized, pitting oedema, which can be rapid and severe. Look in 
dependent areas (ankles if mobile, sacral pad/elbows if bed-bound) and areas of low 
tissue resistance, eg periorbitally. History: Ask about systemic symptoms, eg joint, 
skin. Consider malignancy and chronic infection. : CCF (JVP, pulmonary oedema), 
liver disease (albumin).
Management

1      Reduce oedema

Fluid (1L/day) and salt restriction. Diuresis with loop diuretics, eg furosemide. 
If gut oedema aff ects oral absorption of diuretics, give IV. Use daily weights to 
guide. Aim 0.5–1kg weight loss per day to avoid intravascular volume depletion 
and secondary AKI. Thiazide diuretics can be added if oedema remains resistant 
to high-dose loop diuretics. Albumin infusion increases proteinuria and remains 
controversial with no consistent evidence of beneﬁ t.

2      Treat underlying cause

Adults need a renal biopsy (p310). This is technically more diffi  cult when there 
is gross oedema so diuresis may be required ﬁ rst. Treatment known to induce 
remission should be given, eg corticosteroids in minimal change disease. Look for 
and treat any underlying systemic disease, infection, or malignancy.
In children, minimal change disease is the commonest aetiology and steroids 
induce remission in the majority. Biopsy is therefore avoided in children unless 
there is no response to steroids, or if clinical features suggest another cause: 
age <1yr, family history, extrarenal disease (eg arthritis, rash, anaemia), renal 
failure, haematuria.
3      Reduce proteinuria

ACE-i/ARB reduce proteinuria (may not be needed in minimal change disease).

4      Complications

  • Thromboembolism. Hypercoagulable due to clotting factors, anti-thrombin 
III, and platelet abnormalities. Risk of VTE including DVT/PE (~10% adult pa-
tients) and renal vein thrombosis (loin pain, haematuria, LDH, AKI if bilateral). 
Treat with heparin (may need to dose adjust low-molecular-weight heparin 
if GFR) and warfarin. If low bleeding risk, consider prophylaxis when albumin 
<20g/L.

  • Infection. Urine losses of immunoglobulins and immune mediators lead to risk 
of urinary, respiratory, and CNS infection. Infection also seen in areas of ﬂ uid ac-
cumulation: cellulitis, peritonitis, empyema. Ensure pneumococcal vaccination 
given. Risk of varicella with steroid treatment: post-exposure prophylaxis in 
non-immune, do not give live vaccine if immunosuppressed.

  • Hyperlipidaemia. Cholesterol (>10mmol/L), LDL, triglycerides, HDL. Thought 
due to hepatic synthesis in response to oncotic pressure and defective lipid 
breakdown.  Abnormalities  are  proportional  to  proteinuria.  The  beneﬁ ts  of 
statins in CKD are extrapolated to nephrotic syndrome where there is evidence.

_OHCM_10e.indb   312

_OHCM_10e.indb   312

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
313

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Nephrotic glomerulonephritis
Nephrotic glomerulonephritides9 include:
Minimal change disease
~25% of adult nephrotic syndrome. Idiopathic (most) or in association with drugs 
(NSAIDS, lithium) or paraneoplastic (haematological malignancy, usually Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma). Does not cause renal failure (if progressive CKD consider missed FSGS).
Diagnosis: Light microscopy is normal (hence the name). Electron microscopy 
shows eff acement of podocyte foot processes.
Treatment: Prednisolone 1mg/kg for 4–16 weeks. 75% of adults will respond, >50% 
relapse. Frequent relapses are managed with  or longer-term immune suppres-
sion (cyclophosphamide, calcineurin inhibitors).
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)
Commonest  glomerulonephritis  seen  on  renal  biopsy.  Primary  (idiopathic)  or 
secondary (HIV, heroin, lithium, lymphoma, any cause of kidney mass/nephrons, 
kidney scarring due to another glomerulonephritis). All at risk of progressive CKD 
and kidney failure: proteinuria worsens prognosis. Disease will recur in 30–50% 
of kidney transplants.
Diagnosis: Glomeruli have scarring of certain segments (ie focal sclerosis). May 
miss early disease if <10 glomeruli in biopsy sample.
Treatment:  ACE-i/ARB  and  blood  pressure  control  in  all.  Corticosteroids  only  in 
primary (idiopathic) disease: remission in ~25%, partial remission in up to 50%. 
Calcineurin inhibitors may be considered second line. Plasma exchange and rituxi-
mab have been used for recurrence in transplants.
Membranous nephropathy
~25% of adult nephrotic syndrome. Primary (idiopathic) or secondary to:
  • malignancy: lung, breast, GI, prostate, haematological
  • infection: hepatitis B/C, Streptococcus, malaria, schistosomiasis
  • immunological disease: SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, Sjögren’s
  • drugs: gold, penicillamine.
Indolent disease with spontaneous remission in ~25%.
Diagnosis: Anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibody in 70–80% of idiopathic dis-
ease. Diff usely thickened GBM due to subepithelial deposits (IgG4 dominant in idi-
opathic, other IgGs in secondary disease). ‘Spikes’ on silver stain.
Treatment:  ACE-i/ARB  and  blood  pressure  control  in  all.  Immunosuppression 
(‘Ponticelli’  regimen:  corticosteroids  plus  cyclophosphamide/chlorambucil)  only 
in those at high risk of progression (proteinuria >4g without response to ACE-i/
ARB for 6 months, creatinine by 30% in 6–12 months but eGFR still >30). The role of 
targeted immunosuppression in those positive for anti-phospholipase A2 receptor 
antibodies  remains  unknown.  In  secondary  disease  proteinuria  can  remit  with 
treatment of the underlying cause.
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
~10% of adult nephrotic syndrome (higher in low- and middle-income countries 
due to infection). Divided into:
  • immune-complex  associated: driven by increased or abnormal immune com-
plexes  which  deposit  in  the  kidney  and  activate  complement.  An  underlying 
cause can be found in most adult cases, eg infection, cryoglobulinaemia, mono-
clonal gammopathy, autoimmunity

  • C3 glomerulopathy: due to a genetic or acquired defect in the alternative comple-
ment pathway, eg C3 nephritic factor. Progressive kidney dysfunction is common.
Diagnosis: A proliferative glomerulonephritis with electron dense deposits. Im-
munoglobulin deposition distinguishes immune-complex-associated disease from 
C3 glomerulopathy.
Treatment: ACE-i/ARB and blood pressure control in all. Underlying cause in im-
mune-complex disease. Trial of immunosuppression if no underlying cause found 
and progressive decline in renal function. Treatments to block or modify C3 activa-
tion are awaited.

_OHCM_10e.indb   313

_OHCM_10e.indb   313

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
314

Renal manifestations of systemic disease

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Diabetic nephropathy
DM nephropathy10 is the commonest cause of end-stage renal failure: ~30–40% of 
patients requiring renal replacement. Predicted prevalence  by 25–40% over next 
20 years. Hyperglycaemia leads to growth factors, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
activation, production of advanced glycosylation end-products, and oxidative stress. 
Causes glomerular capillary pressure, podocyte damage, and endothelial dysfunc-
tion.  Albuminuria  is  ﬁ rst  clinical  sign.  Later  scarring  (glomerulosclerosis),  nodule 
formation (Kimmelstiel–Wilson lesions), and ﬁ brosis with progressive loss of renal 
function. Coexisting BP accelerates the disease course.
Diagnosis: Microalbuminuria (‘moderately increased albuminuria’) = A:CR 3–30mg/
mmol (p294, 302). Regression at this level of disease is possible. Not detected on 
standard dipstick  must send A:CR. Screen annually.
Treatment:
  • Intensive DM control prevents microalbuminuria and reduces risk of progression 
to macroalbuminuria (‘severely increased albuminuria’) = A:CR >30mg/mmol. HbA1C 
of 53mmol/mol (7%) reduces the development of all microvascular complications. 
However, less impact on CVD risk and hard renal outcomes including progression to 
kidney failure. Consider risk of hypoglycaemia.

  • BP <130/80. Use ACE-i or ARB for CV and renal protection above BP control. Can pre-
vent progression from normoalbuminuria to microalbuminuria to macroalbuminu-
ria in hypertensive DM. (Less clear beneﬁ t in normotensive DM but recommended 
if A:CR >30mg/mmol.) No head-to-head studies of ACE-i/ARB in DM but equivalence 
outside DM. If cough with ACE-i switch to ARB. No beneﬁ t to dual therapy and risk 
of K+. Data on direct renin inhibitors (eg aliskiren) awaited.
  • Sodium restriction to <2g/day (=<5g sodium chloride/day).
  • Statins to reduce CV risk (p305). Unclear beneﬁ t once on dialysis: do not initiate but 

do not need to discontinue if tolerated.

Lupus nephritis
SLE is a systemic autoimmune disease with antibodies against nuclear components, 
eg double-stranded (ds)DNA. Deposition of antibody complexes causes inﬂ ammation 
and tissue damage. Presentation: Rash, photosensitivity, ulcers, arthritis, serositis, 
CNS eff ects, cytopenias, and renal disease. Nephropathy is common (50% in ﬁ rst year, 
75% overall). Can present as nephritis (p310) or nephrosis (p312). Diagnosis: Clinical. 
Antibody proﬁ le: ANA is sensitive but not speciﬁ c. Anti-dsDNA has a speciﬁ city of 75–
100% and titres correlate with disease activity. Consider biopsy if A:CR >30, P:CR >50. 
Treatment: Depends on histological class. Classes I and II show mild changes with 
little risk of renal disease progression: ACE-i/ARB for renal protection and hydroxy-
chloroquine for extra-renal disease. Classes III-V require immunosuppression: my-
cophenolate, glucocorticoids, cyclophosphamide, rituximab.
Small vessel vasculitis
Multiple classiﬁ cation systems exist. Clinical phenotype and ANCA subtype are im-
portant. ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV) occurs with or without speciﬁ city for pro-
teinase 3 (PR3) and myeloperoxidase (MPO). AAV classically presents at an older age 
(>60yrs) and accounts for 20% of biopsy ﬁ ndings >80yrs. Ask about lethargy, fever, 
myalgia, anorexia (‘When did you last feel well?’). Ask about respiratory symptoms 
and investigate for pulmonary haemorrhage. Diagnosis: Clinical +  ANCA + biopsy: 
rapidly progressive GN (p311) without immune deposits (‘pauci-immune’). Treatment: 
High-dose glucocorticoids plus cyclophosphamide or rituximab. Plasma exchange if 
presents with renal failure or pulmonary haemorrhage.
Myeloma (See p368.)
Associated renal disease in up to 40%: tubular obstruction due to light chain casts 
(‘myeloma kidney’); deposition of Ig/light chains in glomerulus (causes proteinuria); 
hypercalcaemia; renal tract infection due to immunoparesis. Treatment: Adequate 
hydration,  bisphosphonates  for  hypercalcaemia  (care  if  GFR  <30),  anti-myeloma 
treatment including glucocorticoids. It remains unclear whether there is a beneﬁ t 
in removing light chains by either plasma exchange or large pore haemodialysis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   314

_OHCM_10e.indb   314

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
315

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Amyloid
Pathological folding of proteins leads to extracellular accumulation and organ dys-
function  including  kidney  disease.  Classiﬁ ed  according  to  protein:  light  chains  in 
myeloma = AL amyloid; serum amyloid A in chronic inﬂ ammation = AA amyloid; also 
rare familial types. Diagnosis: Congo red staining on biopsy, SAP scan. Treatment: 
Underlying condition. New therapies target amyloid production, aggregation, and 
breakdown.
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS)
Presents  with  a  microangiopathic  haemolytic  anaemia  (Hb  <100g/L,  LDH, 
haptoglobin, fragments on blood ﬁ lm), platelets and AKI due to thrombosis of the 
glomerular  capillaries  (microangiopathy).  In  children,  primarily  associated  with 
haemorrhagic colitis due to Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) eg O157:H7. Atypi-
cal HUS caused by dysregulation/uncontrolled activation of complement = ~ 5% of 
HUS.  Can  be  precipitated  by  pregnancy.  Diagnosis:  Triad  of  haemolytic  anaemia, 
platelets, and AKI with haematuria/proteinuria. ?Evidence of STEC. Look for abnor-
malities in the complement pathway: levels of C3, C4, factors H and I, complement 
mutation screen. Treatment: STEC-HUS: supportive. aHUS: plasma infusion/exchange, 
eculizumab (anti-C5) in England via the national aHUS centre, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
Symptoms  overlap  with  HUS  (see  previous  paragraph).  Pentad:  microangiopathic 
haemolytic anaemia, platelets, AKI , neurological symptoms (headache, palsies, sei-
zure, confusion, coma), and fever. Due to a congenital deﬁ ciency of, or acquired anti-
bodies to, the ADAMTS13 protease which normally cleaves multimers of von Willebrand 
factor (VWF). Large VWF multimers cause platelet aggregation and ﬁ brin deposition 
in small vessels, leading to a multisystem thrombotic microangiopathy. Diagnosis: 
Clinical. ADAMTS13 activity. Treatment: TTP is a haematological emergency: get 
expert help. Plasma infusion/exchange removes antibodies/replaces ADAMTS13 and 
may be life-saving. Corticosteroids. Consider rituximab for non-responders/relapse.
Atherosclerotic renovascular disease
Part of a systemic atheromatous vascular disease including cardio-, cerebro-, and 
peripheral  vascular  disease  (ask  about  claudication,  check  foot  pulses),  BP,  and 
lipids. Leads to renin–angiotensin upregulation which causes treatment-resistant 
BP and/or a deterioration in renal function on ACE-i/ARB. Acute decompensated heart 
failure (no LV impairment on echo) with ﬂ ash pulmonary oedema in up to 10%. Di-
agnosis: >1.5cm asymmetry in renal size (but sensitivity and speciﬁ city). Doppler 
studies of native kidneys not consistently accurate for diagnosis. CT or MR (avoids 
contrast) angiography. Treatment: Modiﬁ cation of CV risk factors: statin, aspirin, 
antihypertensive treatment. Historically, ACE-i/ARB were considered contraindicated 
due to concern about renin–dependent renal perfusion and deterioration in function 
on ACE-i/ARB. However, mortality seen with ACE-i/ARB. eGFR by <25% ‘sacriﬁ ced’ for 
longer-term renal and cardiac outcome. Large RCTs of medical treatment vs revascu-
larization have failed to show an advantage to revascularization  only considered in 
ﬂ ash pulmonary oedema, rapid/oligo-anuric renal failure.
Scleroderma renal crisis
Occurs in ~5% of systemic sclerosis. Risk with: diff use disease, anti-RNA polymerase 
III antibodies and <2yr from diagnosis. Diagnosis: Accelerated hypertension (new 
>150/85mmHg) and  AKI (eGFR by >30%). Biopsy: collapsed glomeruli, onion-skin 
thickening of arterioles. Treatment: ACE-i/ARB. IV vasodilators to vascular resistance 
and  for  digital  ischaemia.  Care  with  -blockers  as  HR  compensating  for  stroke 
volume. May recover renal function after many months.
Sickle cell nephropathy
HbSS is associated with hyperﬁ ltration (lower than expected creatinine) and albumi-
nuria. Although up to 75% of young patients will have some degree of CKD, progres-
sion to renal failure is usually associated with another trigger, eg papillary necrosis, 
infection. Diagnosis:  Clinical. Biopsy only if looking for another diagnosis, eg  AKI 
without clinical cause, nephrotic syndrome. Treatment: ACE-i/ARB. Inconsistent data 
re hydroxycarbamide and hyperﬁ ltration. Mortality on dialysis: aim to transplant.

_OHCM_10e.indb   315

_OHCM_10e.indb   315

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
316

The renal tubule: disorders and diuretics

Tubular disorders and the action of diuretics can be considered according to the 
aff ected segment of the nephron (ﬁ g 7.13 and table 7.8).

Na+
Ω
HCO3
Phosphate
Glucose
Amino acids

Bowman’s
capsule

Cortex
Medulla

Proximal tubule
Thick ascending loop
Distal tubule
Cortical collecting duct

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Na+
ClΩ

Na+
K+
2ClΩ

K+
H+

Collecting 
duct

Bladder

Loop of Henle

Fig 7.13  The nephron divided into segments (proximal tubule, thick ascending loop of Henle, distal 
tubule, collecting duct) with key solute movement (red).
Table 7.8  Summary table of tubular disorders and diuretic action (RTA = renal tubular acidosis)

Solute movement Tubular pathlogy Diuretic
Reabsorption: Na+, 
Mannitol
-, phosphate, 
HCO3
Carbonic anhydrase 
sugars, amino acids
inhibitor
Loop

Fanconi syndrome
Proximal (type 
2) RTA
Bartter syndromes

Nephron segment
Proximal tubule

Thick ascending loop

Distal tubule

Cortical collecting 
duct

Reabsorption: Na+, 
K+, ClΩ
Reabsorption: 
Na+, ClΩ
Excretion: K+, H+

Collecting duct

Excretion: water

Gitelman syndrome Thiazide

Distal (type 1) RTA
Type 4 RTA
Diabetes insipidus 
(p240)

K+-sparing

V2 antagonists 
(‘vaptan’) (p320)

Proximal tubule
Physiology
Reabsorbs Na+ (~70%), bicarbonate, phosphate, amino acids, sugars, uric acid.
Pathology
Fanconi  syndrome: Generalized impairment of proximal tubular function lead-
ing to glycosuria (in a non-diabetic), phosphaturia, uricosuria, aminoaciduria, and 
tubular-proteinuria (negative dipstick but positive urine P:CR p294). Phosphaturia 
leads  to  phosphate  loss  from  bone,  demineralization,  and  growth  impairment. 
Treatment: replace phosphate. Proximal (type 2) renal tubular acidosis (RTA): 
Failure of bicarbonate reabsorption. Distal reabsorption intact so serum bicarbo-
nate usually ≥ 12mmol/L. Accompanied by Fanconi syndrome unless rare familial 
cause. Aetiology: light chain disease, drugs (eg tenofovir), heavy metals. Diagnosis: 
IV bicarbonate increases bicarbonate loss in urine and causes rapid rise in urine pH 
to ~7.5. Treatment: bicarbonate and potassium replacement.
Diuretics
Osmotic diuretic (eg mannitol): Used to ICP and intra-ocular pressure. Freely 
ﬁ ltered but poorly reabsorbed, holding water by osmosis. Na+, K+, Ca2+, ClΩ, Mg2+, 
Ω may be aff ected. Risk of pulmonary oedema if oligo/anuric. Carbonic anhy-
HCO3
drase inhibitor (eg acetazolamide): Used in altitude sickness, glaucoma. Meta-
bolic acidosis due to bicarbonate excretion. Risk of nephrocalcinosis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   316

_OHCM_10e.indb   316

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Thick ascending loop of Henle
Physiology
Reabsorbs Na+ (~10–30%) and other electrolytes. Key transport via electroneutral 
Na+/K+/2ClΩ co-transporter.
Pathology
Bartter syndromes: Due to impaired salt transport in the thick ascending loop. 
Sodium reabsorption increases further along the nephron in exchange for K+ and 
H+  all cause a hypokalaemic, hypochloraemic, metabolic alkalosis. Usually pre-
sent in childhood. Divided into subtypes depending on transport molecule defect. 
Type 1 mimics a loop diuretic. Elevated prostaglandin levels are also a feature. 
Treatment is with salt replacement and the use of NSAIDs (after volume repletion).
Diuretics
Loop  diuretics  (eg  furosemide,  bumetanide):  Block  the  Na+/K+/2ClΩ  co-trans-
porter in the thick ascending loop of Henle, hence increase the solute load of the 
ﬁ ltrate and reduce water resorption. Increase excretion of water, Na+, ClΩ, phos-
phate, Mg2+, Ca2+, K+, and H+. They are readily absorbed from the GI tract (unless it 
is oedematous in which case IV may be needed) with peak concentration within 
30–120min.  Widely  used  in  peripheral  oedema  (heart  failure,  ascites).  They  can 
also be used to treat hypercalcaemia. Side eff ects include hypokalaemic metabolic 
alkalosis, hypovolaemia, and ototoxicity.

317

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Distal tubule
Physiology
Reabsorbs  Na+  (~5–10%)  and  other  electrolytes.  Key  transport  via  NaCl  co-
transporter.
Pathology
Gitelman syndrome: Loss of function of the NaCl co-transporter. Milder than Bar-
tter syndrome: usually presents in adolescence/adulthood with incidental ﬁ nding 
of electrolyte abnormalities. Mimics thiazide diuretic administration. Treat with 
electrolyte supplementation.
Diuretics
Thiazide  (eg  bendroﬂ umethiazide)  and  thiazide-like  diuretics  (eg  indapam-
ide, chlortalidone, metolazone): Inhibit the NaCl transporter  decrease NaCl 
reabsorption and increase water loss. Used to treat BP (p140). Side eff ects: hy-
ponatraemia, hypokalaemia, and hypomagnesaemia. However, calcium excretion 
is reduced (in contrast to loop diuretics)  can be used to treat recurrent kidney 
stones in patients with hypercalciuria. Excretion of uric acid is reduced (care in 
gout). Glucose intolerance can occur (mechanism may be related to hypokalae-
mia) so care in DM. Increase in LDL cholesterol is not signiﬁ cant with chronic use at 
low dose, especially in the context of beneﬁ cial BP reduction.

Cortical collecting duct
Physiology
Acid–base and K+ homeostasis. Aldosterone acts to retain Na+and excrete K+.
Pathology
Distal (type 1) renal tubular acidosis (RTA): Failure of acid (H+) excretion. Primary 
genetic disease or secondary to autoimmune disease (eg Sjögren’s syndrome, SLE), 
toxins (eg lithium). Can cause, or be caused by, nephrocalcinosis (eg medullary 
sponge  kidney,  sarcoid).  Leads  to  bone  demineralization,  renal  calculi.  Hypoka-
laemia can be severe. Diagnosis: urine fails to acidify (pH >5.3) despite metabolic 
acidosis. Treat with bicarbonate replacement and management of underlying dis-
ease. Type 4 RTA: Hyperkalaemia and acidosis due to (real or apparent) hypoaldo-
steronism, eg adrenal insuffi  ciency, DM, ACE-i/ARB, K+-sparing diuretics.
Diuretics
K+-sparing: aldosterone antagonists, eg spironolactone, eplerenone, amiloride.
Used in aldosteronism, heart failure, cirrhosis, K+-wasting states. Decrease Na+ 
and K+ excretion. Can cause K+, acidosis. Oestrogenic eff ects with spironolactone. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   317

_OHCM_10e.indb   317

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
318

Tubulointerstitial nephropathy and nephrotoxins

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

The renal tubules and the interstitium make up ~80% of the kidney. Damage to one 
is usually associated with damage to the other = tubulointerstitial nephropathy. Can 
be acute or chronic.
Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis (ATIN)
Presents with AKI. Eosinophilia in ~30%. An ‘allergic triad’ of fever, rash, and arthral-
gia occurs in ~10%. Should be considered in all cases of AKI for which there is no 
obvious pre-renal or post-renal precipitant (p298). Biopsy shows an inﬂ ammatory 
cell inﬁ ltrate in the interstitium ± tubule (‘tubulitis’). Prognosis improves with early 
recognition although residual CKD in up to 40%. Aetiology:
  • Drugs: antibiotics, NSAIDS, PPIS, diuretics, ranitidine, anticonvulsants, warfarin.
Take a full drug history including over-the-counter and herbal preparations.

  • Infection:  Streptococcus,  Pneumococcus,  Staphylococcus,  Campylobacter,  E. 

coli, Mycoplasma, CMV, EBV, HSV, hepatitis A-C.

  • Autoimmune disease: SLE, sarcoid, Sjögren’s syndrome, ANCA.
Treatment: Stop causative agent or treat underlying cause. Steroids are used de-
spite a paucity of RCT evidence.
Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis (CTIN)
Insidious onset and slowly progressive renal impairment. Biopsy shows interstitial 
ﬁ brosis and tubular atrophy. Most commonly due to drugs (>70%) or infection. Pos-
sible causes include:
  • drugs: NSAIDs (p319), lithium, calcineurin inhibitors, aminosalicylates (eg mesala-

zine, sulfasalazine), chemotherapy (eg cisplatin)

  • infection: TB, pyelonephritis, leptospirosis, HIV
  • immune disease: sarcoid, Sjögren’s syndrome
  • speciﬁ c nephrotoxins: lead, cadmium, mercury, aristolochic acid (p319)
  • haematological disorders: myeloma
  • genetic interstitial disease.
Treatment: Stop causative agent or treat underlying cause. Reduce risk of progres-
sion as per CKD management: ACE-i/ARB, BP control, glucose, lipids (pp304–5). Future: 
antiﬁ brotic agents?

Nephrotoxins
Many agents may be toxic to the kidneys either by direct damage to the tubules, or 
by causing an interstitial nephritis (see earlier in topic). Examples (not an exhaus-
tive list and idiosyncratic reactions are possible):
Analgesics: NSAIDS (p319).
Antimicrobials:  Aminoglycosides  (p319),  sulfamethoxazole  (in  co-trimoxazole), 
penicillins, rifampicin, amphotericin, aciclovir.
Anticonvulsants: Lamotrigine, valproate, phenytoin.
Other drugs: PPIS, cimetidine, furosemide, thiazides, ACE-i /ARB, lithium, iron, cal-
cineurin inhibitors, cisplatin.
Anaesthetic agents: Methoxyﬂ urane, enﬂ urane.
Radiocontrast material: (p319.)
Proteins: IgS in myeloma, light chain disease, Hb in haemolysis, myoglobin in rhab-
domyolysis (p319).
Crystals: Urate (p319).
Bacteria: Streptococci, Legionella, Brucella, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia,  TB, Sal-
monella, Campylobacter, leptospirosis, syphilis.
Viruses: EBV, CMV, HIV, polyomavirus, adenovirus, measles.
Parasites: Toxoplasma, Leishmania.
Other: Ethylene glycol, radiation (p319), aristolochic acid (p319). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   318

_OHCM_10e.indb   318

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
319

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Analgesic nephropathy
Caused by NSAIDS, aspirin, paracetamol. Prevalence since phenacetin withdrawn. 
Risk determined by frequency and duration of use. Presentation: History of chronic 
pain (headache, musculoskeletal). Often silent until advanced CKD. Diagnosis: Uri-
nalysis: normal or sterile pyuria, mild proteinuria. USS: small and irregular kidneys. 
IVU: classic ‘cup and spill’ appearance. Non-contrast CT: renal mass, papillary cal-
ciﬁ cation. Biopsy:  CTIN secondary to papillary necrosis. Risk of atherosclerosis. 
Treatment:  Discontinue  analgesia.  Manage  CKD  (pp304–5).  USS  or  CT urogram  if 
sudden ﬂ ank pain to exclude obstruction from sloughed papilla.
Aminoglycosides (gentamicin >tobramycin >amikacin >streptomycin)
Cause AKI due to tubular necrosis. Risk factors: dose, prolonged use, CKD, volume 
depletion, other nephrotoxins. Presentation: Typically mild, non-oliguric AKI after 
1–2 weeks of therapy. Recovery can be delayed/incomplete. Treatment: Prevention. 
Single daily dose may be less nephrotoxic Check levels (p756).
Radiocontrast nephropathy
AKI 48–72 hours after  IV contrast. Risk factors:  CKD, DM, dose of contrast, volume 
depletion,  other  nephrotoxins.  Treatment:  None.  Prevention  is  key:  pre-hydrate 
with IV cystalloid (no consistent beneﬁ t shown for bicarbonate above 0.9% sodium 
chloride). Use local protocol or consider 3mL/kg/h 1 hour before, and 1mL/kg/h for 
6h after. Acetylcysteine evidence is weak. Discontinue other nephrotoxic medication 
for 24h pre- and post-procedure. Tell the radiologist about risk factors so they can 
use the lowest dose of low/iso-osmolar contrast.
Rhabdomyolysis
Results from skeletal muscle breakdown, with release of intracellular contents (K+, 
myoglobin)  into  the  extracellular  space.  Cytokines  and  nitric  oxide  cause  renal 
vasoconstriction.  Myoglobin  is  ﬁ ltered  by  the  glomeruli  causing  obstruction  and 
inﬂ ammation. Presentation: History of trauma, surgery, immobility, hyperthermia, 
seizures. Muscle pain, swelling, tenderness. AKI. Red-brown urine. Diagnosis: Serum 
myoglobin: short half-life, may be missed. Plasma CK ≈5 upper limit. Myoglobinuria 
(tea- or cola-coloured urine) is falsely +ve for blood on dipstick with no RBC seen on 
3Ω, Ca2+. Treatment: Supportive. Urgent treatment for hyper-
microscopy. K+, PO4
kalaemia (p301). IV ﬂ uid rehydration: maintain urine output 300mL/h until myoglobi-
nuria has ceased; up to 1.5L ﬂ uid/h may be needed. If oliguric, monitor CVP in HDU/ICU 
setting. Renal replacement may be needed. (Alkalinization of urine hypothesized to 
crystallization and toxic metabolites but no RCT evidence to support use over other 
crystalloids and beware Ca2+.)
Urate nephropathy
In acute crystal nephropathy, uric acid crystals precipitate within the tubulointer-
stitium causing GFR and secondary inﬂ ammation. Seen in tumour lysis syndrome 
when a high tumour burden and sensitivity to chemotherapy cause uric acid which 
precipitates in association with phosphate. In addition, serum uric acid is a risk 
factor for CKD: hypothesized stimulus for arterial disease with pathological autoregu-
lation of renal blood ﬂ ow, renin, and BP. Treatment: Tumour lysis: aggressive hy-
dration, allopurinol/rasburicase to synthesis of uric acid. Chronic disease: unclear 
whether diet/treatment to uric acid (allopurinol, febuxostat) improves outcome.
Radiation nephritis
Renal impairment due to ionizing radiation. Presents 6 months–years after total body 
irradiation, local ﬁ eld radiotherapy, or targeted radionucleotide therapy. Presents 
with BP, proteinuria/haematuria, progression to renal failure. Prognosis linked to BP. 
Treatment: Radiation dose with shielding. As CKD (pp304–5) with strict BP control.
Aristolochic acid nephropathy
Herbal remedies containing aristolochic acid can cause progressive CKD. Dispropor-
tionate anaemia, mild proteinuria, and renal dysfunction. Biopsy: extensive ﬁ brosis 
and tubular atrophy. Risk of urothelial malignancy ≈5, occurs in up to 40%. Aris-
tolochic acid thought to be underlying cause of Balkan endemic nephropathy: clus-
ter of CKD/renal failure in Balkan areas where aristolochic acid is detected in wheat. 
Treatment: Avoid exposure. Treat as CKD (pp304–5). Screen for malignancy. Consider 
therapeutic trial of steroids (limited data). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   319

_OHCM_10e.indb   319

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
320

Inherited kidney disease

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l

a
n
e
R

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD)
1 in 400–1000 (~7 million worldwide). De  novo mutation in  ~10%. 2/3 will require 
renal replacement. 85% have mutations in  PKD1 (chromosome 16) and reach  ESRF 
by 50s. Mutation in PKD2 (chromosome 4) has a slower course, reaching ESRF by 70s. 
Presentation: May be clinically silent unless cysts become symptomatic due to size/
haemorrhage (ﬁ g 7.14). Loin pain, visible haematuria, cyst infection, renal calculi, BP, 
progressive renal failure. Extrarenal: liver cysts, intracranial aneurysmSAH (p478), 
mitral valve prolapse, ovarian cyst, diverticular disease. Diagnosis: USS is modality of 
choice. Renal cysts are common and prevalence with age so diagnostic criteria are 
age-speciﬁ c: 15–39yrs ≥ 3 cysts, 40–59yrs >2 cysts in each kidney give a positive pre-
dictive value of 100% for both PKD1 and PKD2 mutations. Sensitivity is >93% for PKD1 
but only 69% for diagnosis of PKD2 <30 years. Liver (90% by age 50) and pancreatic 
cysts (~10%) support the diagnosis. Genetic testing available but ~1500 diff erent mu-
tations are described so use limited to diagnostic uncertainty, potential donors, and 
pre-implantation diagnosis. (Non-contrast) CT for renal colic as cysts obscure view 
on USS. Screening for intracranial aneurysms (MRI) recommended for age <65yrs if 
personal/family history of aneurysm/SAH. Treatment: Water intake 3–4L/day (if eGFR 
>30) may suppress cyst growth. BP should be treated to target <130/80mmHg: 1st-
line ACE-i/ARB, 2nd-line thiazide-like, 3rd-line -blocker (not calcium channel blocker 
as Ca2+ entry is part of pathology although no speciﬁ c outcome data). Treat infec-
tion. Haematuria usually managed conservatively. Persistent/severe pain may need 
cyst decompression. Plan for RRT including pre-emptive transplantation. Ongoing re-
search evaluating drugs which inhibit cyst growth including vasopressin antagonists 
(tolvaptan: decrease in kidney volume seen), somatostatin analogues, metformin, 
and transcription inhibitors.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease
1 in 20 000, chromosome 6. Presents ante/perinatally with renal cysts (‘salt and pep-
per’ appearance on USS), congenital hepatic ﬁ brosisportal hypertension. Poor prog-
nosis if neonatal respiratory distress. No speciﬁ c therapy. (See OHCS p132.)
Renal phakomatoses
Tuberous sclerosis complex: 1 in 6000, autosomal dominant. Two genes: TSC1 (chro-
mosome 9) and TSC2 (chromosome 16). Multisystem disorder with hamartoma for-
mation  in  skin,  brain  (epilepsy),  eye,  heart,  and  lung  (see  OHCS p638).  In  kidney: 
angiomyolipomata in 90% with risk of aneurysm and haemorrhage, cystic disease 
in 50%. Replacement of renal tissue leads to kidney failure. mTORC1 inhibitors (eg 
sirolimus, everolimus) block pathological cell signalling and reduce tumour volume.
Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome: 1 in 36 000, autosomal dominant (p712). Mutation in 
VHL gene (chromosome 3) leads to uncontrolled activation of growth factors. Pheno-
type is a familial, multisystem cancer syndrome including renal cysts and clear cell 
renal carcinoma at mean age 40s, ~70% risk by age 60 (VHL tumour-suppressor gene 
is inactiv ated in most sporadic renal cell cancers). Manage by screening for tumours. 
Possibility of future therapies which inhibit growth factor signalling.
Alport syndrome
1 in 5000. ~80–85% X-linked. Due to mutations in the COL4A5 gene, which encodes the 
5 chain of type IV collagen. Haematuria, proteinuria, and progressive renal insuffi  -
ciency. Average age of renal failure in men 30–40yrs. Female ‘carriers’ can exhibit the 
phenotype, renal failure in ~30% by 60yrs. High-tone sensorineural hearing loss. An-
terior lenticonus: bulging of lens seen on slit-lamp examination (see OHCS p638). Type 
IV collagen is the antigen in anti-GBM disease (p311) so there is a risk of anti-GBM dis-
ease following transplantation as the graft type IV collagen is recognized as ‘foreign’.
Fabry disease
1 in 40 000–120 000. X-linked. Lysosomal storage disorder due to a deﬁ ciency of the 
enzyme -galactosidase-A. Causes proteinuria and progressive renal failure in most 
men and some female ‘carriers’. Lipid deposits are seen in urine and on renal biopsy 
(‘zebra body’). Treatment with IV enzyme replacement can stabilize kidney function 
if proteinuria controlled to <1g/24h.

_OHCM_10e.indb   320

_OHCM_10e.indb   320

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Cystinuria
1 in 17 000. Autosomal recessive defect prevents reabsorption of cystine and dibasic 
amino acids in proximal tubule. Leads to cystinuria and cystine stone formation. 
Treatment: diet, ﬂ uid intake, and urine alkalinization. Current drugs which increase 
cystine solubility have adverse side-eff ect proﬁ les.
Cystinosis
1 in 100 000–200 000. Autosomal recessive. Lysosomal storage disorder with accumula-
tion of cystine. In nephropathic forms causes proximal tubule dysfunction, Fanconi 
syndrome (p316), and progressive renal impairment. Also visual impairment, myopathy, 
hypothyroidism. Oral cysteamine intralysosomal cystine, and delays ESRF, but is poorly 
tolerated (GI symptoms, skin deposits, fever, seizures). 

321

e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m

l
a
n
e
R

Fig 7.14  A polycystic kidney (left) compared with a normal-sized kidney (right). 
The progressive increase in size can lead to abdominal discomfort. There may be 
haemorrhage into a cyst causing haematuria, or infection.

Courtesy of the PKD Foundation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   321

_OHCM_10e.indb   321

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
8  Haematology

Contents
A sense of humourism  323
Anaemia  324
Iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia  326
Anaemia of chronic disease  326
Sideroblastic anaemi  a  326
The peripheral blood ﬁ lm  328
The diff erential white cell 

count  330

Macrocytic anaemia  332
B12 deﬁ ciency and pernicious 

anaemia  334

An approach to haemolytic 

anaemia  336

Causes of haemolytic anaemia  338
Sickle-cell anaemia  340
Thalassaemia  342
Bleeding disorders  344
Coagulations pathways  345
An approach to bleeding  346
Blood transfusion and bood 

products  348
Anticoagulants  350
Leukaemia and the on-call 

junior doctor  352

Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  354
Acute myeloid leukaemia  356
Chronic myeloid leukaemia  358
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia  359
Hodgkin’s lymphoma  360
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma  362
Pancytopenia and bone marrow 

failure  364

Myeloproliferative disorders  366
Myeloma  368
Paraproteinaemia  370
Amyloidosis  370
Erythrocyte sedimentation

rate (ESR)  372

Plasma viscosity (PV)  372
Hyperviscosity syndrome  372
The spleen and splenectomy  373
Thrombophilia  374
Immunosuppressive drugs  376

Fig 8.1  Here  we  see  William  Blake’s  Los  work-
ing  alone  and  at  night,  hammering  a  red  cell 
into  shape  in  the  forge  of  the  human  heart. 
‘For  every  space  larger  than  a  red  globule  of 
Man’s  blood/  Is  visionary,  and  is  created  by  the 
Hammer  of  Los:/  And  every  Space  smaller  than 
a Globule of Man’s blood opens/ Into Eternity of 
which this vegetable Earth is but a shadow./ The 
red Globule is the unwearied Sun by Los created./ 
To  measure  Time  and  Space  to  mortal  Men  …’ 
(William  Blake’s  Milton  (1804–1810),  lines  17–24.) 
When we ourselves are working alone and at night, 
hammering away at some diffi  cult problem within 
the arteries of the hospital, we can lose sight of the 
context in which our own red globule sits. Unfortu-
nately, as with Los’ task, ours is one with an eternity 
of duties within and external to it. Rather than be-
coming overwhelmed by a seemingly endless job list, 
we must take our focus from the single red cell to the 
surrounding interconnected systems; by prioritizing 
our tasks and asking for help when we need it, we 
might not face such a solitary and interminable fate.
© Wikimedia/ Library of Congress

We thank our Specialist Reader, Dr Drew Provan, for his contribution to this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   322

_OHCM_10e.indb   322

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

323

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

A sense of humourism
Whilst  our  understanding  of  blood  has  changed  emphatically  with  the  advent 
of  medical  research,  its  importance  in  health  and  disease  is  a  common  theme 
throughout human history and culture. Hippocrates (460–370BC) ﬁ rst described 
the four bodily ﬂ uids, or humours (Latin umor = body ﬂ uid): blood, phlegm, and 
yellow and black bile. This is not bile and phlegm as we know it; rather, it was 
postulated by Fahråeus (1921, the Swedish physician who pioneered the ESR, p372) 
that humourism arose from watching blood coagulate in vitro: distilling into layers 
of bilious yellow serum ﬂ oating on a scurf of white cells, with the dark red-black 
clot of erythrocytes lurking in the depths of the sample.

These four humours were later elaborated by Roman physician, surgeon, and 
philosopher  Claudius  Galen  (c.129–c.201AD)  who  attributed  physical  and  behav-
ioural traits to each humour: sanguine people are warm hearted and conﬁ dent, 
the phlegmatic practical and rational, those with a choleric nature are ﬁ ery and 
passionate,  while  the  melancholic  (melas=black,  khole=bile)  are  depressed  yet 
creative.1  It  was  thought  that  an  imbalance  of  any  of  these  elements  was  the 
source of disease, a belief which led to the wide-scale recommendation of the 
removal of the excess bodily ﬂ uid: expectoration, purging, and most popularly, 
blood-letting. William Harvey, Sydenham, and Dupytren are among the famous 
names who celebrated this cure, Harvey stating that ‘daily experience satisﬁ es 
us that blood-letting has a most salutary eff ect in many diseases, and is indeed 
the  foremost  among  all  the  general  remedial  means’.  Many  tools  were  devel-
oped  to  aid  this  procedure,  notably  a  collecting  bowl  with  a  convenient  notch 
for the antecubital fossa or neck: the predecessor of the modern kidney dish.

Such  was  the  conviction  of  the  healing  brought  about  by  bloodletting  that 
‘haematomania’ reigned despite a suspicious degree of mortality. Indeed, it may 
have even killed inaugural US president George Washington in 1799: on develop-
ing laryngitis he was enthusiastically bled four times by his personal physician, 
and died 24 hours after symptom onset.

Eventually, the credibility of this practice waned, and by 1860 it had virtually 
disappeared. However, venesection still plays an important role in the manage-
ment of haemachromatosis (see p288) and polycythaemia rubra vera (p366).

Fig 8.2  A normal blood ﬁ lm, with a neutrophil, red cells, and platelets (arrows).

©Prof. K Lewandowski & Dr H Jastrow.

1  Compare these personalities with those of the 2015 anthropomorphic Pixar ﬁ lm ‘Inside Out’.

_OHCM_10e.indb   323

_OHCM_10e.indb   323

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

324

Anaemia

Anaemia is deﬁ ned as a low haemoglobin (Hb) concentration, and may be due either 
to a low red cell mass or increased plasma volume (eg in pregnancy). A low Hb (at sea 
level) is <135g/L for men and <115g/L for women. Anaemia may be due to reduced pro-
duction or increased loss of RBCS and has many causes. These will often be distinguish-
able by history, examination, and inspection of the blood ﬁ lm (ﬁ g 8.2, p323).
Symptoms Due to the underlying cause or to the anaemia itself: fatigue, dyspnoea, 
faintness, palpitations, headache, tinnitus, anorexia—and angina if there is pre-exist-
ing coronary artery disease.
Signs May be absent even in severe anaemia. There may be pallor (eg of the con-
junctivae, see ﬁ g 8.3, although this is not a reliable sign). In severe anaemia (Hb 
<80g/L),  there  may  be  signs  of  a  hyperdynamic  circulation,  eg  tachycardia,  ﬂ ow 
murmurs (ejection-systolic loudest over apex), and cardiac enlargement; or retinal 
haemorrhages (rarely). Later, heart failure may occur: here, rapid blood transfusion 
can be fatal.
Types of anaemia The ﬁ rst step in diagnosis is to look at the mean cell volume 
(MCV). Normal MCV is 76–96 femtolitres (1015 fL = 1L).
Low MCV (microcytic anaemia):
1      Iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia (IDA), the most common cause: see p326.
2      Thalassaemia (suspect if the MCV is ‘too low’ for the Hb level and the red cell 

count is raised, though deﬁ nitive diagnosis needs DNA analysis): see p342.

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

3      Sideroblastic anaemia (very rare): p326.
NB: there is iron accumulation in the last two conditions, and so tests will show in-
creased serum iron and ferritin with a low total iron-binding capacity (TIBC).
Normal MCV (normocytic anaemia):
1      Acute blood loss.
2      Anaemia of chronic disease (or MCV).
3      Bone marrow failure.
4      Renal failure.
NB: if wcc or platelet in normocytic anaemia, suspect marrow failure: see p364.
High MCV (macrocytic anaemia):
1      B12 or folate deﬁ ciency.
2      Alcohol excess—or liver disease.
3      Reticulocytosis (p328, eg with haemolysis).
4      Cytotoxics, eg hydroxycarbamide.

5      Myelodysplastic syndromes.
6      Marrow inﬁ ltration.
7      Hypothyroidism.
8      Antifolate drugs (eg phenytoin).

5      Hypothyroidism (or MCV).
6      Haemolysis (or MCV).
7      Pregnancy.

Haemolytic  anaemias:  These  do  not  ﬁ t  into  the  above-mentioned  classiﬁ cation 
as the anaemia may be normocytic or, if there are many young (hence larger) RBCS 
and reticulocytes, macrocytic (p332). Suspect if there is a reticulo cytosis (>2% of 
RBCS; or retic ulocyte count >100≈109/L), mild macro cytosis, haptoglobin, bilirubin, 
LDH, or urobilinogen. These patients will often be mildly jaundiced (but note that 
haemolysis causes pre-hepatic jaundice so there will be no bilirubin in their urine).
Does the patient need a blood transfusion? Probably not if Hb >70g/L. Chronic 
anaemia in particular can be well-tolerated (though it is crucial to ascertain the 
cause), and in IDA iron supplements will raise the Hb more safely and cost-eff ec-
tively. In acute anaemia (eg haemorrhage with active peptic ulcer), transfusion for 
those with Hb <70g/L may be indicated. Other factors to consider include comor-
bidities (particularly IHD) and whether the patient is symptomatic.
In severe anaemia with heart failure, transfusion is vital to restore Hb to a safe 
level, eg 60–80g/L, but this must be done with great care. Give it slowly with 10–
4 0mg furosemide  IV/PO with alternate units (dose depends on previous exposure 
to diuretics; do not mix with blood). Check for signs of worsening overload: rising 
JVP and basal crackles: in this eventuality, stop and treat. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   324

_OHCM_10e.indb   324

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

325

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.3  ‘Conjunctival  pallor’,  the  classic  sign  of  anaemia,  is  a  confusing  term  as 
the conjunctiva is translucent, trans mitting the colour of structures under it. The 
‘pallor’  refers  to  the  vasculature  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  lid  which  is  lacking 
Hb. It is this colour 

 but it should be: 

Red cell distribution width (RCDW or RDW)
In health or in unifactorial anaemia, all the red cells in a sample are about the same 
size, and the graph of their volume distribution forms a narrow peak. In mixed 
anaemias, however, this peak broadens, reﬂ ecting an abnormally large RDW—this 
may be the ﬁ rst clue to dual pathology. In coeliac disease, for example, poor ab-
sorption of iron (MCV) and folate (MCV) may occur simultaneously, resulting in a 
combination of microcytes and macrocytes in the circulation. The visual analogue 
of this is anisocytosis (p328) on a blood ﬁ lm. The laboratory measure is a RDW, 
where RDW = the standard deviation of MCV divided by the mean MCV, multiplied 
by 100. Reference interval: 11 . 5–14 . 6%. If the MCV is high and the RDW is normal, the 
cause is likely to be alcohol, liver disease, or a marrow problem (chemotherapy or 
aplastic anaemia).

_OHCM_10e.indb   325

_OHCM_10e.indb   325

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

326

Iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia (IDA)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

This is common (seen in up to 14% of menstruating women).
Causes •Blood loss, eg menorrhagia or GI bleeding2 (upper p256; lower p629).
  • Poor diet or poverty may cause IDA in babies or children (but rarely in adults).
  • Malabsorption (eg coeliac disease) is a cause of refractory IDA.
  • In the tropics, hookworm (GI blood loss) is the most common cause.
Signs Chronic IDA (signs now rare): koilonychia (ﬁ g 8.4 and p76), atrophic glossitis, 
angular cheilosis (ﬁ g 8.5), and, rarely, post-cricoid webs (Plummer–Vinson syndrome).
Tests Blood ﬁ lm: microcytic, hypochromic anaemia with anisocytosis and poikilo-
cytosis  (ﬁ gs  8.6,  8.7).  MCV,  MCH,  and  MCHC.  Conﬁ rmed  by  ferritin  (also  serum 
iron with TIBC, but these are less reliable, see table 8.1). NB: ferritin is an acute 
phase  protein  and    with  inﬂ ammation,  eg  infection,  malignancy.  Transferrin 
is also  in  IDA but is less aff ected by inﬂ ammation. Check coeliac serology in all 
(p266): if negative then refer all males and females who are not menstruating for 
urgent gastroscopy and colonoscopy. Consider stool microscopy for ova if relevant 
travel history. Faecal occult blood is not recommended as sensitivity is poor. IDA 
with no obvious source of bleeding mandates careful GI workup.2
Treatment Treat the cause. Oral iron, eg ferrous sulfate 200mg/8h PO. SE: nausea, ab-
dominal discomfort, diarrhoea or constipation, black stools. Hb should rise by 10g/L/
week, with a modest reticulocytosis (young RBC, p328). Continue for at least 3 months 
after Hb normalizes to replenish stores. IV iron is only indicated if the oral route is 
impossible or ineff ective, eg functional iron deﬁ ciency in chronic renal failure, where 
there is inadequate mobilization of iron stores in response to erythropoietin therapy.
The usual reason that IDA fails to respond to iron replacement is that the patient 
has rejected the pills—check compliance. Is the reason for the problem GI distur-
bance? Altering the dose of elemental iron with a diff erent preparation may help. 
Alternatively, there may be continued blood loss, malabsorption, anaemia of chron-
ic disease; or misdiagnosis, eg when thalassaemia is to blame.

Anaemia of chronic disease (secondary anaemia)

The commonest anaemia in hospital patients (and the 2nd commonest, after IDA, 
worldwide). It arises from three problems (in which the polypeptide, hepcidin, plays 
a key role): 1  Poor use of iron in erythropoiesis. 2  Cyto kine-induced shortening of RBC 
survival. 3  Production of and response to erythropoietin.
Causes Many, eg chronic infection, vasculitis, rheumatoid, malignancy, renal failure.
Tests Ferritin normal or  in mild normocytic or microcytic anaemia (eg Hb >80g/L; 
see table 8.1). Check blood ﬁ lm, B12, folate, TSH, and tests for haemolysis (p336).
Treatment Treating the underlying disease may help (eg in 60% of patients with 
RA),  as  may  erythropoietin  (SE:  ﬂ u-like  symptoms,  hypertension,  mild  rise  in  the 
platelet  count  and  thromboembolism).  Also  eff ective  in  improving  quality  of  life 
in  malignant  disease.  IV  iron  can  safely  overcome  the  functional  iron  deﬁ ciency. 
Hepcidin inhibitors and inﬂ ammatory modulators show promise.

Sideroblastic anaemia

Microcytic anaemia does not always mean iron deﬁ ciency! 20% of older people with 
an  MCV  <75fL  are  not  iron  deﬁ cient.  Think  of  sideroblastic  anaemia  whenever 
microcytic  anaemia  is  not  responding  to  iron. This condition is characterized by 
ineff ective erythropoiesis, leading to iron absorption, iron loading in marrow ± hae-
mosiderosis (endocrine, liver, and heart damage due to iron deposition).
Causes Congenital  (rare,  x-linked)  or  acqui red,  eg  idiopathic  as  one  of  the  myelo-
dysplastic/myeloprolif erative diseases, can also follow chemotherapy, anti-TB drugs, 
irradiation, alcohol or lead excess. Tests Look for ferritin, a hypo chromic blood ﬁ lm, 
and disease-deﬁ ning sideroblasts in the marrow (ﬁ gs 8.8, 8.9; table 8.1). Treatment 
Remove the cause. Pyridoxine ± repeated transfusions for severe anaemia.

2  In one study, 11% presenting to their GP with IDA had GI carcinoma. Plan both upper and lower GI investiga-
tion: there may be abnormalities on both.

_OHCM_10e.indb   326

_OHCM_10e.indb   326

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 8.1  Interpreting plasma iron studies

Iron deﬁ ciency
Anaemia of chronic disease
Chronic haemolysis
Haemochromatosis
Pregnancy
Sideroblastic anaemia

Iron







TIBC




 (or )



Ferritin







327

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.4  Koilonychia: spoon-shaped nails.

Fig 8.5  Angular cheilosis (also known as sto-
matitis): ulceration at the side of the mouth. 
Also a feature of vitamin  B12 and  B2 (riboﬂ a-
vin) deﬁ ciency, and glucagonoma (p223).

Courtesy of Dr Joseph Thompson: AskAnOrtho-
dontist.com.

Fig 8.6  Microcytic hypochromic cells.

Fig 8.7  Poikilocytosis and anisocytosis.

Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.8  Ring sideroblasts in the marrow, with a 
perinuclear ring of iron granules, found in sidero-
blastic anaemia.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig  8.9  Two  ringed  sideroblasts  showing 
how  the  distribution  of  peri nuclear  mito-
chondrial  ferritin  can  vary.    The  problem  in 
congenital sideroblastic anaemia is disordered 
mitochondrial haem synthesis.

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇlu.

_OHCM_10e.indb   327

_OHCM_10e.indb   327

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

328

The peripheral blood ﬁ lm

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Many haematological (and other) diagnoses are made by careful examination of 
the peripheral blood ﬁ lm. It is also necessary for interpretation of the FBC indices.
Features Include:
Acanthocytes: (ﬁ g 8.10) Spicules on RBCS ( unstable RBC membrane lipid structure); 
causes: splenectomy, alcoholic liver disease, abetalipoproteinaemia, spherocytosis.
Anisocytosis: Variation in RBC size, eg megaloblastic anaemia, thalassaemia, IDA.
Basophilic RBC stippling: (ﬁ g 8.11) Denatured RNA found in RBCS, indicating acceler-
ated erythropoiesis or defective Hb synthesis. Seen in lead poisoning, megaloblastic 
anaemia, myelodysplasia, liver disease, haemoglobinopathy, eg thalassaemia.
Blasts: Nucleated precursor cells. They should not normally appear in peripheral 
blood but do in myeloﬁ brosis, leukaemia, and malignant marrow inﬁ ltration.
Burr cells (echinocytes): RBC projections (less marked than in acanthocytes); ﬁ g 8.12.
Cabot rings: Seen in: pernicious anaemia; lead poisoning; bad infections (ﬁ g 8.13).1
Dimorphic picture: Two populations of red cells. Seen after treatment of Fe,  B12, 
or folate deﬁ ciency, in mixed deﬁ ciency (Fe with B12 or folate), post-transfusion, 
or with primary sideroblastic anaemia, where a clone of abnormal erythroblasts 
produce abnormal red cells, alongside normal red cell production.
Howell–Jolly  bodies:  DNA nuclear remnants in  RBCS, which are normally removed 
by the spleen (ﬁ g 8.14). Seen post-splenectomy and in hyposplenism (eg sickle-cell 
disease, coeliac disease, congenital, UC/Crohn’s, myeloproliferative disease, amyloid). 
Also in dyserythropoietic states: myelodysplasia, megaloblastic anaemia.
Hypochromia: (p326.) Less dense staining of RBCS due to Hb synthesis, seen in IDA, 
thalassaemia, and sideroblastic anaemia (iron stores unusable, p366).
Left shift: Immature neutrophils released from the marrow, eg in infection (ﬁ g 8.15).
Leukoerythroblastic ﬁ lm: Immature cells (myelocytes, promyelocytes, metamyelo-
cytes, normoblasts) ± tear-drop RBCS from haemolysis or marrow inﬁ ltration/infec-
tion (malign ancy; TB; brucella; visceral leishmaniasis;  parvovirus B19) .
Leukaemoid reaction: A marked leucocytosis (WCC >50≈109/L). Seen in severe illness, 
eg with infection or burns, and also in leukaemia.
Pappenheimer  bodies: (ﬁ g 8.16) Granules of siderocytes containing iron. Seen in 
lead poisoning, carcinomatosis, and post-splenectomy.
Poikilocytosis: Variation in RBC shape, eg in IDA, myeloﬁ brosis, thalassaemia.
Polychromasia: RBCS of diff erent ages stain unevenly (young are bluer). This is a re-
sponse to bleeding, haematinic replacement (ferrous sulfate, B12, folate), haemolysis, 
or marrow inﬁ ltration. Reticulocyte count is raised.
Reticulocytes: (Normal range: 0.8–2%; or <85≈109/L.) (ﬁ g 8.17) Young, larger RBCS 
(contain  RNA)  signifying  active  erythropoiesis.  Increased  in  haemolysis,  haemor-
rhage, and if B12, iron, or folate is given to marrow that lack these.
Right shift: Hypermature white cells: hypersegmented polymorphs (>5 lobes to nu-
cleus) seen in megaloblastic anaemia, uraemia, and liver disease. See p333, ﬁ g 8.25.
Rouleaux formation: (ﬁ g 8.18) Red cells stack on each other (causing a raised ESR; 
p372). Seen with chronic inﬂ ammation, paraproteinaemia, and myeloma.
Schisto cytes: Fragmented RBCS sliced by ﬁ brin bands, in intravascular haemolysis 
(p339, ﬁ g 8.31). Look for microangiopathic anaemia, eg DIC (p352), haemolytic urae-
mic syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP: p315), or pre-eclampsia.
Spherocytes:  Spherical  cells  found  in  hereditary  spherocytosis  and  autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia. See p338.
Target cells: (Also known as Mexican hat cells, ﬁ g 8.14 and ﬁ g 8.41, p343.) These are 
RBCS with central staining, a ring of pallor, and an outer rim of staining seen in liver 
disease, hyposplenism, thalassaemia—and, in small numbers, in IDA.
Tear-drop RBCS: Seen in extramedullary haematopoiesis; see leukoerythroblastic ﬁ lm.

3  Cabot ‘ﬁ gure-of-eight’ rings may be micro tubules from mitotic spindles. It is easy to confuse them with 
malaria parasites, p416 (especially if stippling gives a ‘chromatin dot’ artefact, as here). Richard Clarke 
Cabot (1868–1939) liked diagnostic challenges: he founded the notoriously hard but beautifully presented 
weekly clinicopathological exercises of the Massachusetts General Hospital which made the New England 
Journal of Medicine so famous. He also wisely recommended that: ‘before you tell the truth to the patient, 
be sure you know the truth, and that the patient wants to hear it’. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   328

_OHCM_10e.indb   328

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

329

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.10  Acanthocytosis.

Fig 8.11  Basophilic stippling.

©Dr N Medeiros.

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. 
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts 
Medical Society.

Fig 8.12  Burr cells: the cause may be renal or 
liver failure, or an EDTA storage artefact.

©Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.13  A Cabot ring.3  

©Crookston Collection.

Fig  8.14  Film  in  hyposplenism:  target  cell 
(short arrow), acanthocyte (long arrow), and a 
Howell–Jolly body (arrow head).
From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. 
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts 
Medical Society.

Fig 8.15  Left shift: presence of immature neu-
trophils in the blood. See p328.

©Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

Fig 8.16  Pappenheimer bodies.

Top image ©Prof. Christine Lawrence,
bottom image ©Crookston Collection.

Fig  8.17  Reticulocytes.  RNA  in  RBCs;  supravital 
staining (azure B; cresyl blue) is needed.

©Dr N Medeiros.

Fig 8.18  Rouleaux formation.

©Dr N Medeiros.

_OHCM_10e.indb   329

_OHCM_10e.indb   329

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

330

The diff  erential white cell count

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Neutrophils (ﬁ gs 8.19, 8.20) 2–7.5 ≈ 109/L (40–75% of white blood cells: but absolute 
values are more meaningful than percentages).
Increased in (ie neutrophilia):
  • Bacterial infections.
  • Inﬂ ammation, eg myocardial infarction, polyarteritis nodosa.
  • Myeloproliferative disorders.
  • Drugs (steroids).
  • Disseminated malignancy.
  • Stress, eg trauma, surgery, burns, haemorrhage, seizure.
Decreased in (ie neutropenia—see p352):
  • Viral infections.
  • Drugs: post-chemotherapy, cytotoxic agents, carbimazole, sulfonamides.
  • Severe sepsis.
  • Neutrophil antibodies (SLE, haemolytic anaemia)—destruction.
  • Hypersplenism (p373), eg Felty’s syndrome (p698).
  • Bone marrow failure—production (p364).
Other neutrophil responses to infection: These include: • vacuoles in the cytoplasm 
(the most speciﬁ c sign of bacterial infection); • Döhle bodies: inconspicuous grey-blue 
areas of cytoplasm (residual ribosomes). Up to 17% of neutrophils from females show 
a drumstick-shaped Barr body (arrow, ﬁ g 8.20d). It is the inactivated X chromosome.
Lymphocytes (ﬁ g 8.21) 1 . 5–4 . 5 ≈ 109/L (20–45%).
Increased in (ie lymphocytosis):
  • Acute viral infections.
  • Chronic infections, eg TB, brucellosis, hepatitis, syphilis.
  • Leukaemias and lymphomas, especially chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL).
Large numbers of abnormal (‘atypical’) lymphocytes are characteristically seen with 
EBV infection: these are T cells reacting against EBV-infected B cells. They have a large 
amount of clearish cytoplasm with a blue rim that ﬂ ows around neighbouring RBCS. 
Other causes of ‘atypical’ lymphocytes: see p405.
Decreased in (ie lymphopenia):
  • Steroid  therapy;  SLE;  uraemia;  Legionnaire’s  disease;  HIV infection;  marrow  inﬁ l-

tration; post chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

T-lymphocyte subset reference values: CD4 count: 537–1571/mm3 (low in HIV infection). 
CD8 count: 235–753/mm3; CD4/CD8 ratio: 1 . 2–3 . 8.
Eosinophils (ﬁ g 8.22) 0.04–0.4 ≈ 109/L (1–6%). 
Increased in (ie eosinophilia):
  • Drug reactions, eg with erythema multiforme, p562.
  • Allergies: asthma, atopy.
  • Parasitic infections (especially invasive helminths).
  • Skin disease: especially pemphigus, eczema, psoriasis, dermatitis herpetiformis.
Also seen in malignant disease (including lymphomas and eosinophilic leukaemia), 
PAN, adrenal insuffi  ciency,  irradiation, Löffl  er’s syndrome (p704), Churg–Strauss sym-
drome (p696) and during the convalescent phase of any infection.
The hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) occurs when eosinophila >1 . 5 ≈ 109/L is sustained 
for  >6  weeks  leading  to  end-organ  damage  (endomyocardial  ﬁ brosis  and  restrictive 
cardiomyopathy, skin lesions, thrombo embolic disease, lung disease, neuropathy, and 
hepatospleno megaly). The cause is often unknown, though if FIP1L1-PDFRA genotype, dia-
g nose myeloprolif erative HES or eosinophilic leukaemia. : PO steroids ± mepoli zumab 
(anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody). Imatinib is 1st choice for myoproliferative HES.
Monocytes (ﬁ g  8.23) 0 . 2–0 . 8 ≈ 109/L (2–10%). Increased in (ie monocytosis): the 
aftermath of chemo- or radiotherapy, chronic infections (eg malaria, TB, brucellosis, 
protozoa), malignant disease (including M4 and M5 acute myeloid leukaemia (p356), 
and Hodgkin’s disease), myelodysplasia.
Basophils (ﬁ g 8.24) 0–0 . 1 ≈ 109/L (0–1%). Increased in (ie basophilia): myeloprolif-
erative disease, viral infections, IGE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions (eg urticaria, 
hypo thyroid ism), and inﬂ ammatory disorders (eg UC, rheumatoid arthritis). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   330

_OHCM_10e.indb   330

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig 8.19  Neutrophil. These ingest and kill bac-
teria, fungi, and damaged cells.

Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

Fig  8.20  Neutrophils:  (a)  ‘toxic  granulation’ 
seen in infection or pregnancy; (b) normal ap-
pearances;  (c)  ‘left  shift’:  immature  forms  are 
released with few lobes to their nuclei, seen in 
infection; (d) Barr body (arrow, see text).

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇlu.

331

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.21  Lymphocyte: divided into T & B types, 
which have important roles in cell-med i ated im-
munity and antibody production.

Fig 8.22  Eosinophil: these mediate allergic re-
actions and defend against parasites.

Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

Fig 8.23  Monocyte: precursors of tissue mac-
rophages.

Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

Fig 8.24  Basophil. The cytoplasm is ﬁ lled with 
dark-staining  granules,  containing  histamine, 
myeloperoxidase and other enzymes. On bind-
ing IgE, histamine is released from the basophil.
Courtesy of Prof. Krzysztof Lewandowski.

_OHCM_10e.indb   331

_OHCM_10e.indb   331

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

332

Macrocytic anaemia

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Macrocytosis (MCV >96fL) is common, and may not always be accompanied by anae-
mia (eg in alcohol excess).
Causes of macrocytosis (MCV >96fL)
  • Megaloblastic: (ﬁ g 8.25) a megaloblast is a cell in which nuclear maturation is 
delayed compared with the cytoplasm. This occurs with B12 (p334) and folate de-
ﬁ ciency: both are required for DNA synthesis. Another cause is cytotoxic drugs.
  • Non-megaloblastic: Alcohol excess, reticulocytosis (eg in haemolysis), liver dis-

ease, hypothyroidism, pregnancy.

  • Other haematological disease: Myelodysplasia (ﬁ g 8.26), myeloma, myeloprolif-

erative disorders, aplastic anaemia.

Tests B12 and folate deﬁ ciency result in similar blood ﬁ lm and bone marrow biopsy 
appearances.
Blood ﬁ lm: Hypersegmented neutrophils (ﬁ g 8.25) in B12 and folate deﬁ ciency. Target 
cells if liver disease; see ﬁ g 8.14, p329 and ﬁ g 8.41, p343.
Other tests: LFT (include GT), TFT, serum B12, and serum folate (or red cell folate—a 
more reliable indicator of folate status, as serum folate only reﬂ ects recent intake).
Bone marrow biopsy is indicated if the cause is not revealed by the above tests. It 
is likely to show one of the following four states:

1      Megaloblastic marrow.
2      Normoblastic marrow (eg in liver disease, hypothyroidism).
3      Abnormal erythropoiesis (eg sideroblastic anaemia, p326, leukaemia, aplasia).
4      Increased erythropoiesis (eg haemolysis).

Folate  Found  in  green  vegetables,  nuts,  yeast,  and  liver;  it  is  synthesized  by  gut 
bact eria. Body stores can last for 4 months. Maternal folate deﬁ ciency causes fe-
tal neural tube defects. It is absorbed by duodenum/proximal jejunum.
Causes of deﬁ ciency:
  • Poor diet, eg poverty, alcoholics, elderly.
  • Increased  demand,  eg  pregnancy  or  cell  turnover  (seen  in  haemolysis,  malig-

nancy, inﬂ ammatory disease, and renal dialysis).
  • Malabsorption, eg coeliac disease, tropical sprue.
  • Alcohol.
  • Drugs: anti-epileptics (phenytoin, valproate), methotrexate, trimethoprim.
Treatment:  Assess  for  an  underlying  cause,  eg  poor  diet,  malabsorption.  Treat 
with folic acid 5mg/day PO for 4 months, never without B12 unless the patient is 
known to have a normal B12 level, as in low B12 states it may precipitate, or worsen, 
subacute  combined  degeneration  of  the  cord  (p334).  In  pregnancy,  prophy lactic 
doses of folate (400mcg/day) are given from conception until at least 12wks; this 
helps prevent spina biﬁ da, as well as anaemia.
NB: in unwell patients (eg CCF) with megaloblastic anaemia, it may be necessary to 
treat before serum B12 and folate results are known. Do tests then treat with large 
doses  of  hydroxocobalamin,  eg  1mg/48h  IM—see  BNF,  with  folic  acid  5mg/24h  PO. 
Blood transfusions are very rarely needed (see p324).

_OHCM_10e.indb   332

_OHCM_10e.indb   332

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

333

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.25  Megaloblastic  anaemia:  peripheral 
blood ﬁ lm showing many macrocytes and one 
hypersegmented  neutrophil  (normally  there 
should be ≤5 segments).
From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B,
 ‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. 
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts 
Medical Society.

Fig 8.26  Oval macrocytes seen here in myelod-
ysplastic syndromes. Note aniso- and poikilocy-
tosis with small fragmented cells (schistocytes). 
NB:  B12  and  folate  deﬁ ciencies  also  cause  oval 
macrocytes,  but  macrocytes  caused  by  alcohol 
and liver disease are usually round.

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇ lu.

_OHCM_10e.indb   333

_OHCM_10e.indb   333

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

334

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

B12 deﬁ ciency and pernicious anaemia
Vitamin B12 deﬁ ciency is common, occurring in up to 15% of older people. B12 helps 
synthesize  thymidine,  and  hence  DNA,  so  in  deﬁ ciency  RBC  production  is  slow. 
Untreated, it can lead to megaloblastic anaemia (p332) and irreversible CNS compli-
cations.   Body stores of B12 are suffi  cient for 4yrs.
Causes  of  deﬁ ciency  • Dietary  (eg  vegans:  B12  is  found  in  meat,  ﬁ sh,  and  dairy 
products, but not in plants). • Malabs orption: during digestion, intrinsic factor (IF) 
in the stomach binds B12, enabling it to be absorbed in the terminal ileum. Malab-
sorption can therefore arise in the stomach due to lack of IF (pernicious anaemia, 
post gastrectomy) or the terminal ileum (ileal resection, Crohn’s disease, bacterial 
overgrowth, tropical sprue, tapeworms). • Congenital metabolic errors.
Features  General:  Symptoms  of  anaemia  (p324),  ‘lemon  tinge’  to  skin  due  to 
combination  of  pallor  (anaemia)  and  mild  jaundice  (due  to  haemolysis),  glossitis 
(beefy-red sore tongue; ﬁ g 8.27), angular cheilosis (p326).
Neuropsychiatric: Irritability, depression, psychosis, dementia.
Neurological:  Paraesthesiae,  peripheral  neuropathy.  Also  subacute  combined 
degeneration  of  the  spinal  cord,  a  combination  of  peripheral  sensory  neuropa-
thy with both upper and lower motor neuron signs due to B12. The patient may 
display  the  classical  triad  of:  • extensor  plantars  (UMN)  • absent  knee  jerks  (LMN) 
• absent ankle jerks (LMN). The onset is insidious (subacute) and signs are symmet-
rical. There is a combination of post erior (dorsal) column loss, causing the sensory 
and LMN signs, and corticospinal tract loss, causing the motor and UMN signs (p446). 
The  spinothalamic  tracts  are  preserved  so  pain  and  temperature  sensation  may 
remain  intact  even  in  severe  cases.  Joint-position  and  vibration  sense  are  often 
aff ected  ﬁ rst  leading  to  ataxia,  followed  by  stiff ness  and  weakness  if  untreated. 
The neurological signs of B12 deﬁ ciency can occur without anaemia.
Pernicious anaemia (PA) This is an autoimmune condition in which atrophic gastritis 
leads to a lack of IF secretion from the parietal cells of the stomach. Dietary B12 there-
fore remains unbound and conseqeuently cannot be absorbed by the terminal ileum.
Incidence: 1:1000; :≈1.6:1; usually >40yrs; higher incidence if blood group A.
Associations: Other autoimmune diseases (p553): thyroid disease (~25%), vitiligo, 
Addison’s  disease,  hypoparathyroidism.  Carcinoma  of  stomach  is  ~3-fold  more 
common in pernicious anaemia, so have a low threshold for upper GI endoscopy.
4. • Reticulocytes may 
Tests: • Hb. • MCV. • WCC and platelets if severe. • Serum B12
be  as production impaired. • Hypersegmented neutrophils (p332). • Megaloblasts in 
the marrow. • Speciﬁ c tests for PA: 1 Parietal cell antibodies: found in 90% with PA, 
but also in 3–10% without. 2 IF antibodies: speciﬁ c for PA, but lower sensitivity.
Treatment: Treat the cause if possible. If due to malabsorption, give hydroxoco-
balamin (B12) 1mg  IM alternate days for 2wks (or, if  CNS signs, until improvement 
stops), then 1mg  IM every 3 months for life. If the cause is dietary, then oral  B12 
can  be  given  after  the  initial  IM  course  (50–150mcg/daily,  between  meals).  Im-
provement is indicated by a transient marked reticulocytosis (MCV), after 4–5 days.
Practical hints: • Beware of diagnosing PA in those under 40yrs old: look for GI ma-
labsorption (small bowel biopsy, p266).
  • Watch for hypokalaemia due to uptake into new haematopoietic cells.
  • Transfusion is best avoided, but PA with high-output CCF may require transfusion, 

after doing tests for FBC, folate, B12, and marrow sampling.

  • As haematopoiesis accelerates on treatment, additional iron may be needed.
  • Hb rises ~10g/L per week; WCC and platelet count should normalize in 1wk.
Prognosis:  Supplementation  usually  improves  peripheral  neuropathy  within  the 
ﬁ rst 3–6 months, but has little eff ect on cord signs. Patients do best if treated as 
soon as possible after the onset of symptoms: don’t delay!

4  Serum B12 levels are normal in many patients with subclinical B12 deﬁ ciency. Measuring homocysteine or 
methylmalonic acid ( if B12 low) may be helpful, but these are non-standard tests.

_OHCM_10e.indb   334

_OHCM_10e.indb   334

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

335

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.27  The  big,  beefy  tongue  of  B12  deﬁ ciency 
glossitis.  Other  causes  of  glossitis:  iron  (or  Zn) 
deﬁ ciency,  pellagra,  contact  dermatitis/speciﬁ c 
food intolerances, Crohn’s disease, drugs (minocy-
cline, clarithromycin, some ACE-i), TB of the tongue. 
Glossitis may be the presenting feature of coeliac 
disease or alcoholism. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   335

_OHCM_10e.indb   335

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

336

An approach to haemolytic anaemia

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Haemolysis  is  the  premature  breakdown  of  RBCS,  before  their  normal  lifespan  of 
~120d. It occurs in the circulation (intravascular) or in the reticuloendothelial sys-
tem, ie macrophages of liver, spleen, and bone marrow (extravascular). In sickle-cell 
anaemia, lifespan may be as short as 5d. Haemolysis may be asymptomatic, but if 
the bone marrow does not compensate suffi  ciently, a haemolytic anaemia results.

An  approach  is  ﬁ rst  to  conﬁ rm  haemolysis  and  then  ﬁ nd  the  cause—try  to 

answer these four questions:
1      Is there increased red cell breakdown?

  • Anaemia with normal or MCV.
  • Bilirubin: unconjugated, from haem breakdown (pre-hepatic jaundice).
  • Urinary urobilinogen (no urinary conjugated bilirubin).
  • Serum LDH, as it is released from red cells.

2      Is there increased red cell production?

  • Reticulocytes, causing MCV (reticulocytes are large immature RBCS) and poly-

chromasia.

3      Is the haemolysis mainly extra- or intravascular?

Extravascular haemolysis may lead to splenic hypertrophy and splenomegaly.
Features of intravascular haemolysis are:
  • Free plasma haemoglobin: released from RBCS.
  • Methaemalbuminaemia: some free Hb is broken down in the circulation to pro-
duce haem and globin; haem combines with albumin to make methaemalbumin.

  • Plasma haptoglobin: mops up free plasma Hb, then removed by the liver.
  • Haemoglobinuria: causes red-brown urine, in absence of red blood cells.
  • Haemosiderinuria:  occurs  when  haptoglobin-binding  capacity  is  exceeded, 
causing free Hb to be ﬁ ltered by the renal glomeruli, with absorption of free 
Hb via the renal tubules and storage in the tubular cells as haemosiderin. This 
is detected in the urine as sloughed tubular cells by Prussian blue staining ~1 
week after onset (implying a chronic intravascular haemolysis).

4      Why is there haemolysis? Causes are on p338.
History Family history, race, jaundice, dark urine, drugs, previous anaemia, travel.
Examination  Jaundice,  hepatosplenomegaly,  gallstones  (pigmented,  due  to  bili-
rubin from haemolysis), leg ulcers (due to poor blood ﬂ ow).
Tests FBC, reticulocytes, bilirubin, LDH, haptoglobin, urinary urobilinogen. Thick and 
thin  ﬁ lms  for  malaria  screen  if  history  of  travel.  The  blood  ﬁ lm  may  show  poly-
chromasia and macrocytosis due to reticulocytes, or point to the diagnosis:
  • Hypochromic microcytic anaemia (thalassaemia).
  • Sickle cells (sickle-cell anaemia).
  • Schistocytes (ﬁ g 8.30, p339; microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia).
  • Abnormal cells in haematological malignancy.
  • Spherocytes (hereditary spherocytosis or autoimmune haemolytic anaemia).
  • Elliptocytes (ﬁ g 8.36, p339; hereditary elliptocytosis).
  • Heinz  bodies,  ‘bite’  cells  (ﬁ g  8.32,  p339;  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase

deﬁ ciency).

Further tests (if the cause is still not obvious)
  • Osmotic  fragility testing will conﬁ rm the presence of membrane abnormalities 

which have been identiﬁ ed on the ﬁ lm.

  • Hb electrophoresis will detect haemoglobinopathies.
  • The direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test (DAT, ﬁ g 8.28) identiﬁ es red cells coated with 

antibody or complement, the presence of which indicates an immune cause.

  • Enzyme assays are reserved for when other causes have been excluded.

_OHCM_10e.indb   336

_OHCM_10e.indb   336

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

337

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.28  The direct Coombs test detects antibodies on RBCS. The indirect Coombs test is used 
in  pre-natal  testing  and  before  blood  transfusion.  It  detects  antibodies  against  RBCs  that  are 
free in serum: serum is incubated with RBCS of known antigenicity. If agglutination occurs, the 
indirect Coombs test is positive.

With kind permission of Aria Rad.

_OHCM_10e.indb   337

_OHCM_10e.indb   337

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

338

Causes of haemolytic anaemia

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Acquired
1    Immune-mediated/direct antiglobulin test +ve: (Coombs test, p337.)

  • Drug-induced:  causing  formation  of  RBC  autoantibodies  from  binding  to  RBC 
membranes (eg penicillin) or production of immune complexes (eg quinine).
  • Autoimmune  haemolytic  anaemia  (AIHA; ﬁ g 8.29): mediated by autoantibod-
ies causing mainly extravascular haemolysis and spherocytosis. Classify accord-
ing  to  optimal  binding  temperature  to  RBCs:  Warm  AIHA:  IgG-mediated,  bind 
at body T° 37°C. : Steroids/immunosuppressants (± splenectomy). Cold  AIHA: 
IgM-mediated, bind at T° (<4°C), activating cell-surface complement. Causes a 
chronic anaemia made worse by cold, often with Raynaud’s or acrocyanosis. : 
keep warm. Chloram bucil may help. Causes:  most are idiopathic; 2° causes of 
warm AIHA include lympho proliferative disease (CLL, lymphoma), drugs, autoim-
mune disease, eg SLE. Cold AIHA may follow infection (mycoplasma; EBV).

  • Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria: seen with viruses/syphilis. It is caused by 
Donath–Landsteiner antibodies sticking to RBCS in the cold, causing self-limit-
ing complement-mediated haemolysis on rewarming.

  • Isoimmune: acute transfusion reaction (p349); haemolysis of the newborn. 
2    Direct antiglobulin/Coombs Ωve  AIHA: (2% of all AIHA.) Autoimmune hepatitis; 
hepatitis B & C; post ﬂ u and other vaccinations; drugs (piperacillin, rituximab). 
3    Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia (MAHA): Mechanical damage to RBCS in circula-
tion, causing intravascular haemolysis and schistocytes (ﬁ gs 8.30, 8.31). Causes include 
haemolytic–uraemic  syndrome  (HUS),  TTP  (p315),  DIC,  pre-eclampsia,  and  eclampsia. 
Prosthetic heart valves can also cause mechanical damage.

4    Infection: Malaria (p416): RBC lysis and ‘blackwater fever’ (haemoglobinuria). All 

infections can exacerbate haemolysis.

5    Paroxysmal  nocturnal  haemoglobinuria:  Rare  acquired  stem  cell  disorder,  with 
haemolysis  (esp.  at  nighthaem oglobinuria,  ﬁ g  15.8,  p705),  marrow  failure  + 
thrombophilia.  Tests:  urinary  haemosiderin  +ve;  if  suspect  in  Coombs  -ve 
intravascular haemolysis, seek conﬁ rmation by ﬂ ow cytometry. : anti coagulation; 
monoclonal anticomplement antibodies (eg eculizumab); stem cell transplantation.

Hereditary
1     Enzyme defects:

  • Glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  (G6PD)  deﬁ ciency  (X-linked):  the  chief 
RBC  enzyme  defect,  aff ects  100  million  (mainly  )  in  Mediterranean,  Africa, 
Middle/Far  East.  Most  are  asymptomatic,  but  may  get  oxidative  crises  due  to 
gluta thione  production,  precipitated  by  drugs  (eg  primaquine,  sulfonamides, 
aspirin), exposure to Vicia faba (broad beans/favism), or illness. In attacks, there 
is rapid anaemia and jaundice. Film: bite- and blister-cells (ﬁ gs 8.32, 8.33). Tests: 
Enzyme  assay  (>8wks  after  crisis  as  young  RBCs  may  have  enough  enzyme  so 
results normal). : Avoid precipitants (eg, henna, ﬁ g 8.34); transfuse if severe.
  • Pyruvate  kinase  deﬁ ciency  (AUTOSOMAL  RECESSIVE):  ATP  production  causes  RBC 
survival. Homozygotes have neonatal jaundice; later, haemolysis with splenomeg-
aly ± jaundice. Tests: enzyme assay. : often not needed; splenectomy may help.
2    Membrane defects: All are Coombs Ωve; all need folate; splenectomy helps some.
  • Hereditary  spherocytosis (AUTOSOMAL  DOMINANT):  prevalence:  1:3000.  Less  de-
formable spherical RBCS, so trapped in spleen  extravascular haemolysis. Signs: 
Splenomegaly, jaundice. Tests: Mild if Hb >110g/L and reticulocytes <6%; ﬁ lm: ﬁ g 
8.35.  Bilirubin (gallstones).

  • Hereditary elliptocytosis (AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT): ﬁ lm: ﬁ g 8.36. Mostly asympto-
matic (somewhat protects from malaria). 10% display a more severe phenotype 
(± death in utero).

  • Hereditary ovalocytosis and stomatocytosis are rarer. Refer to a haematologist.

3    Haemoglobinopathy: • Sickle-cell disease (p340). • Thalassaemia (p342).

_OHCM_10e.indb   338

_OHCM_10e.indb   338

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

339

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.29  Autoimmune  haemolytic  anae mia: 
antibody-coated red cells under going phagocy-
tosis by monocytes.

© Prof C Lawrence.

Fig  8.30  Microangiopathic  anaemia,  eg  from 
DIC: num erous cell fragments (schisto cytes) are 
present.

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

Fig  8.31  Fibrin  strands,  deposited  in  HUS  and 
TTP (p315), slicing up RBCS (micro angiopathy).

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

Fig 8.32  A bite-cell in G6PD, after removal of a 
Heinz body by the spleen; these are formed from 
denatured Hb during oxidative crises.

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

BEWARE!

Fig 8.33  Blister-cells (arrows) in G6PD, following 
removal  of  Heinz  bodies.  Also  contracted  red 
cells (arrowheads).

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

Fig 8.34  Avoid henna use in G6PD deﬁ ciency!

© Catherine Cartwright-Jones (artist) and Roy 
Jones (photographer).

Fig  8.35  Hereditary  spherocytosis.  Osmotic 
fragility tests: RBCS show fragility in hypotonic 
solutions.

Fig 8.36  Hereditary elliptocytosis.

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B, 
‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. Copyright 
© 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted 
with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.

_OHCM_10e.indb   339

_OHCM_10e.indb   339

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

340

Sickle-cell anaemia

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Sickle-cell anaemia is an autosomal recessive disorder in which production of abnor-
mal haemoglobin results in vaso-occlusive crises. It is most commonly seen in people 
of African origin, and arises from an amino acid substitution in the gene coding for 
the  chain (Glu  Val at position 6) which leads to production of HbS rather than 
HbA (HbA2 and HbF are still produced). Homozygotes (SS) have sickle-cell anaemia 
(HbSS), and hetero zygotes (HbAS) have sickle-cell trait, which causes no disability 
(and protects from falciparum malaria). Heterozygotes may still, however, experi-
ence symptomatic sickling in hypoxia, eg in unpressurized aircraft or anaesthesia (so 
all those of African descent need a pre-op sickle-cell test).
Pathogenesis HbS polymerizes when deoxygenated, causing RBCS to deform, pro-
ducing sickle cells, which are fragile and haemolyse, and also block small vessels.
Prevalence 1:700 people of African descent.
Tests  Haemolysis  is  variable.  Hb ≈ 60–90g/L,  reticulocytes  10–20%,  bilirubin. 
Film: sickle cells and target cells (ﬁ g 8.37). Sickle solubility test: +ve, but does not 
distinguish between HbSS and HbAS. Hb electrophoresis: Conﬁ rms the diagnosis 
and distinguishes SS, AS states, and other Hb variants. Aim for diagnosis at birth 
(cord blood) to aid prompt pneumococcal prophylaxis (vaccine, p167 ± penicillin V).
Signs/symptoms Chronic haemolysis is usually well tolerated (except in crises; see 
BOX ‘Managing sickle-cell crises’).
Vaso-occlusive ‘painful’ crisis: Common, due to microvascular occlusion. Often af-
fects the marrow, causing severe pain, triggered by cold, dehydration, infection, or 
hypoxia. Hands and feet are aff ected if <3yrs old leading to dactylitis. Occlusion may 
cause mesenteric ischaemia, mimicking an acute abdomen.  CNS infarction occurs 
in ~10% of children, leading to stroke, seizures, or cognitive defects. Trans cranial 
Doppler ultrasonography indicates risk of impending stroke, and blood transfusions 
can prevent this by reducing HbS. Also avascular necrosis (eg of femoral head), leg 
ulcers (ﬁ g 8.38) and low-ﬂ ow priapism (also seen in CML, may respond to hydration, 
-agonists, eg phenylephrine, or aspiration of blood + irrigation with saline; if for 
>12h prompt cavernosus–spongiosum shunting can prevent later impotence). 
Aplastic  crisis:  This  is  due  to  parvovirus  B19,  with  sudden  reduction  in  marrow 
production, especially RBCs. Usually self-limiting <2wks; transfusion may be needed.
Sequestration  crisis:  Mainly  aff ects  children  as  in  adults  the  spleen  becomes 
atrophic. There is pooling of blood in the spleen ± liver, with organomegaly, severe 
anaemia, and shock. Urgent transfusion is needed.
Complications  • Splenic  infarction  occurs  before  2yrs  old,  due  to  micro-
vascular  occlusion,  leading  to  susceptibility  to  infection  (40%  of  childhood 
sickle  deaths  are  caused  this  way).  • Poor  growth.  • Chronic  renal  failure.  • Gall-
stones. • Retinal disease. • Iron overload (see  BOX ‘A 7-year-old ...’). •Lung damage: 
hypoxiaﬁ brosispulmonary hypertension.
Management of chronic disease Get help from a haematologist.
  • Hydroxycarbamide if frequent crises (production of fetal haemoglobin, HbF). Dose 

example: 20mg/kg/d if eGFR >60mL/min.

  • Splenic infarction leads to hyposplenism and immunocompromise. Prophylaxis, in 

terms of antibiotics and immunization, should be given (p373).

  • Febrile  children  risk  septicaemia:  repeated  admission  may  be  avoided  by  early 
rescue out-patient antibiotics, eg ceftriaxone (eg 2 doses, 50mg/kg  IV on day 0 
and 1). Consider admission if Hb <50g/L, WCC <5 or >30 ≈ 109/L, T° >40°C, severe 
pain, dehydration, lung inﬁ ltration. Seek expert advice.

  • Bone marrow transplant can be curative but remains controversial.
Prevention Genetic counselling; prenatal tests (OHCS pp154–5). Parental education 
can help prevent 90% of deaths from sequestration crises. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   340

_OHCM_10e.indb   340

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

341

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Managing sickle-cell crises
  • Give prompt, generous analgesia, eg IV opiates (see p574). Most sickle patients 

will have a personalized analgesia plan—ask them! Seek expert help early.

  • Crossmatch blood, check FBC and reticulocyte count.
  • Do a septic screen: blood cultures, MSU ± CXR if T° or chest signs.
  • Rehydrate with IVI and keep warm. Give O2 by mask if Pa O2 or O2 sats <95%.
  • Consider starting antibiotics empirically if T° >38°, unwell, or chest signs.
  • Measure PCV, reticulocytes, liver, and spleen size twice daily.
  • Give blood transfusion if Hb or reticulocytes fall sharply. This helps oxygenation, 
and is as good as exchange transfusion. Match blood for the blood group anti-
gens Rh(C, D, E) and Kell, to prevent alloantibody formation.

  • Exchange transfusion is reserved for those who are rapidly worsening: it is a 
process where blood is removed and donor blood is given in stages. Indications: 
severe chest crisis, suspected CNS event, or multiorgan failure—when the propor-
tion of HbS should be reduced to <30%.

  • Inform their haematologist of admission early.
The acute chest syndrome: Entails pulmonary inﬁ ltrates involving complete lung 
segments, causing pain, fever, tachypnoea, wheeze, and cough. It is serious. Inci-
dence: ~0.1 episodes/patient/yr. 13% in the landmark Vichinsky study needed ven-
tilation, 11% had CNS symptoms, and 9% of those over 20 years old died. Prodromal 
painful crisis occur ~2.5 days before any abnormalities on CXR in 50% of patients. 
The chief causes of the inﬁ ltrates are fat embolism from bone marrow or infection 
with Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, or viruses.  : O2, analgesia, empirical antibiotics 
(cephalosporin + macrolide) until culture results known. Bronchodilators (eg sal-
butamol, p182) have proved to be eff ective in those with wheezing or obstructive 
pulmonary function at presentation. Blood transfusion (exchange if severe). Take 
to ITU if Pa O2 cannot be kept above 9.2kPa (70mmHg) when breathing air.
Patient-controlled analgesia is a good option if supportive measures and oral 
analgesia do not control pain. Start with morphine 1mg/kg in 50mL 5% glucose 
(paediatric dose) and try a rate of 1mL/h, allowing the patient to deliver extra 
boluses of 1mL when needed. Check respiratory rate and GCS every ¼h + O2 sats 
if chest/abdominal pain. Liaise with the local pain service.

Fig 8.37  Sickle-cell ﬁ lm: there are sickle cells, 
target cells, and a nucleated red cell.

©Prof. C Lawrence.

Fig 8.38  Leg ulcers in sickle-cell dis ease.

©Prof. C Lawrence.

A 7-year-old tells us what it’s like to have sickle-cell disease

‘I have been hospitalized over 50 times for complications from this disease. To 
keep it controlled I started having monthly transfusions. After repeated trans-
fusions my body began to get too much iron so I had to start getting infusions. 
I was taking the medication desferal 5 which my mummy had to insert a needle 
in my belly hooked up to a pump which I had to carry on my back in my neat 
Spiderman backpack. I was hooked up to the machine for 10 hours a day 5 days 
a  week  but  it  was  okay  I  still  got  to  play!!!  I  suff ered  from  pain  crisis  which 
makes my legs and back hurt like someone is hitting me with a hammer.

You  may  notice  that  I  may  move  slow  or  look  tired  when  it  is  time  for  my 
blood transfusion. That is because the transfusions are like a heartbeat for my 
body,  without  it  I  can’t  survive.  When  I’m  in  pain  the  only  thing  that  helps  is 
morphine… I tell my mummy when she’s crying I WILL BE OK!!’

5  This was necessary until a once-daily oral iron chelator came along: deferasirox.

_OHCM_10e.indb   341

_OHCM_10e.indb   341

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

342

Thalassaemia

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

The thalassaemias are genetic diseases of unbalanced Hb synthesis, with underpro-
duction (or no production) of one globin chain (see table 8.2 and BOX). Unmatched 
globins precipitate, damaging RBC membranes, causing their haemolysis while still 
in the marrow. They are common in areas from the Mediterranean to the Far East.
The    thalassaemias  Usually  caused  by  point  mutations  in  -globin  genes  on 
chromosome  11,  leading  to    chain  production  (+)  or  its  absence  (0).  Various 
combinations of mutations are possible (eg 0/0, +/+, or +/0).
Tests:  FBC,  MCV,  ﬁ lm,  iron,  HbA2,  HbF,  Hb  electrophoresis.  MRI  where  myocardial 
siderosis suspected (from iron overload). 
  thalassaemia  minor  or  trait  (eg  /+;  heterozygous  state):  this  is  a  carrier 
state,  and  is  usually  asymptomatic.  Mild,  well-tolerated  anaemia  (Hb  >90g/L) 
which may worsen in pregnancy.  MCV <75fL, HbA2 >3.5%, slight HbF. Often con-
fused with iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia.
 thalassaemia intermedia: describes an intermediate state with moderate anae-
mia but not requiring transfusions. There may be splenomegaly. There are a vari-
ety  of  causes  including  mild  homozygous    thalassaemia  mutations,  eg  +/+,  or 
co-inheritance  of    thalassaemia  trait  with  another  haemoglobinopathy,  eg  HbC 
thalassaemia  (one  parent  has  the  HbC  trait,  and  the  other  has  +).  Sickle-cell  + 
thalassaemia produces a picture similar to sickle-cell anaemia.
  thalassaemia  major:  denotes  signiﬁ cant  abnormalities  in  both  -globin  genes, 
and  presents  in  the  1st  year,  with  severe  anaemia  and  failure  to  thrive.  Extra-
medullary haematopoiesis (RBCS made outside the marrow) occurs in response to 
anaemia, causing characteristic head shape, eg skull bossing (ﬁ gs 8.39, 8.40) and 
hepato spleno megaly  (also  due  to  hae molysis).  There  is  osteopenia  (may  respond 
to zoledronic acid). Skull X-ray shows a ‘hair on end’ sign due to marrow activity. 
Life-long  blood  transfusions  are  needed,  with  resulting  iron  overload/deposition 
seen after ~10yrs as endocrine failure (pituitary, thyroid, pancreasdiabetes mel-
litus), liver disease, and cardiac toxicity. The ﬁ lm shows very hypochromic, micro-
cytic cells + target cells + nucleated RBCs. HbF, HbA2 variable, HbA absent.
Treatment:  Promote ﬁ tness; healthy diet. Folate supplements help. 
  • Regular (~2–4 weekly) life-long transfusions to keep Hb >90g/L, to suppress the 
ineff ective  extramedullary  haematopoiesis  and  to  allow  normal  growth.  Iron 
overload  is  a  big  problem  causing  hypothyroidism,  hypocalcaemia,  and  hypo-
gonadism. Can be mitigated by iron-chelators (deferiprone PO + desferrioxamine 
sc twice weekly. SE: pain, deafness, cataracts, retinal damage, risk of Yersinia). 
Large doses of ascorbic acid can also help by urinary excretion of iron.

  • Splenectomy if hypersplenism persists with increasing transfusion requirements 

(p373)—this is best avoided until >5yrs old due to risk of infections.

  • Hormonal  replacement  or  treatment  for  endocrine  complications,  eg  diabetes 
mellitus, hypothyroidism. Growth hormone treatment has had variable success.

  • A histocompatible marrow transplant can off er the chance of a cure. 
Prevention: Approaches include genetic counselling or antenatal diagnosis using 
fetal blood or DNA, then ‘therapeutic’ abortion.
The   thalassaemias  (ﬁ g  8.41)  There  are  two  separate  -globin  genes  on  each 
chromosome 16  there are four genes (termed /). The  thalassaemias are 
mainly caused by gene deletions. If all four  genes are deleted (--/--), death is in 
utero (Bart’s hydrops). Here, HbBarts (4) is present, which is physiologically use-
less. HbH disease occurs if three genes are deleted (--/-); there may be moderate 
anaemia  and  features  of  haemolysis:  hepatosplenomegaly,  leg  ulcers,  and  jaun-
dice. In the blood ﬁ lm, there is formation of 4 tetramers (=HbH) due to excess  
chains, HbBarts, HbA, and HbA2. If two genes are deleted (--/ or -/-), there 
is  an  asymptomatic  carrier  state,  with  MCV.  With  one  gene  deleted,  the  clinical 
state is normal.

_OHCM_10e.indb   342

_OHCM_10e.indb   342

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Structure of haemoglobin
Table 8.2  The three main types of Hb in adult blood

Type
HbA
HbA2
HbF

Peptide chains
2 2
2 2
2 2

% in adult blood % in fetal blood
97
2.5
0.5

10–50
Trace
50–90

Adult haemoglobin (HbA  ) is a tetramer of 2 - and 2 -globin chains each con-
taining a haem group. In the ﬁ rst year of life, adult haemoglobin replaces fetal 
haemoglobin (HbF).

It might be thought that because the molecular details of the thalassaemias are 
so well worked out they represent a perfect example of the reductionist principle 
at work: ﬁ nd out exactly what is happening within molecules, and you will be able 
to explain all the manifestations of a disease. But this is not so. We have to recog-
nize that two people with the identical mutation at their  loci may have quite dif-
ferent diseases. Co-inheritance of other genes and conditions (eg  thalassaemia) 
is part of the explanation, as is the effi  ciency of production of fetal haemoglobin. 
The reasons lie beyond simple co-segregation of genes promoting the formation 
of fetal Hb. The rate of proteolysis of excess -globin chains may also be impor-
tant—as may mechanisms that have little to do with genetic or molecular events. 

343

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.40   thalassaemia major: skull x-ray.

©Crookston collection.

Fig 8.39   thalassaemia major: bossing due to 
extramedullary haematopoiesis.

©Dr E van der Enden.

Fig  8.41   thalassaemia showing Mexican hat cells (also called target cells)—one of which is 
arrowed on the left panel. Note also the tear-drop cell on the right panel, and the 2 normo blasts 
(nucleated red cells, one on each panel). The shorter arrow on the left panel points to a Howell–
Jolly body. Note that the cells which are not Mexican hats are rather small (microcytic). There is 
also poikilocytosis (poikilos is Greek for varied—so this simply means that the red blood cells 
are of varied shape). 

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇlu.

_OHCM_10e.indb   343

_OHCM_10e.indb   343

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

344

Bleeding disorders

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

After injury, three processes halt bleeding: vasoconstriction, gap-plugging by plate-
lets, and the coagulation cascade (ﬁ g 8.42). Disorders of haemostasis fall into these 
three groups. The pattern of bleeding is important—vascular and platelet disorders 
lead to prolonged bleeding from cuts, bleeding into the skin (eg easy bruising and 
purpura), and bleeding from mucous membranes (eg epistaxis, bleeding from gums, 
menorrhagia). Coagulation disorders cause delayed bleeding into joints and muscle.
1  Vascular defects Congenital: Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome (p708), conn ective 
tissue disease (eg Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, OHCS p642, pseudoxanthoma elasticum). 
Acquired:  Senile  purpura,  infection  (eg  meningococcal,  measles,  dengue  fever), 
steroids, scurvy (perifollicular haemorrhages), Henoch–Schönlein purpura (p702).
2  Platelet  disorders  Decreased  marrow  production:  Aplastic  anaemia  (p364), 
megaloblastic  anaemia,  marrow  inﬁ ltration  (eg  leukaemia,  myeloma),  marrow 
suppression  (cytotoxic  drugs,  radiotherapy).  Excess  destruction:  Immune:  im-
mune  thrombocytopenia  (ITP,  see  BOX  ‘Immune  thrombocytopenia’),  other  auto-
immune  causes,  eg  SLE,  CLL,  drugs,  eg  heparin,  viruses;  Non-immune:  DIC  (p352), 
thrombotic  thrombocytopenic  purpura  (TTP),  or  HUS  (p315),  sequestration  (in  hy-
persplenism).  Poorly  functioning  platelets:  Seen  in  myeloproliferative  disease, 
NSAIDS, and urea.
3  Coagulation  disorders  Congenital:  Haemophilia,  von  Willebrand’s  disease 
(p712). Acquired: Anticoagulants, liver disease, DIC (p352), vitamin K deﬁ ciency.
Haemophilia A Factor VIII deﬁ ciency; inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern in 
1 : 10 000 male births—usually due to a ‘ﬂ ip tip’ inversion in the factor VIII gene in 
the X chromosome. There is a high rate of new mutations (30% have no family his-
tory). Presentation depends on severity and is often early in life or after surgery/
trauma—with  bleeds  into  joints  leading  to  crippling  arthropathy,  and  into  mus-
cles causing haematomas (pressure can lead to nerve palsies and compartment 
syndrome). Diagnose by APTT and factor  VIII assay. Management: Seek expert 
advice. Avoid NSAIDS and IM injections (ﬁ g 8.43). Minor bleeding: pressure and el-
evation of the part. Desmopressin (0 . 3mcg/kg/12h IVI over 20min) raises factor VIII 
levels, and may be suffi  cient. Major bleeds (eg haemarthrosis): factor  VIII levels 
to  50%  of  normal,  eg  with  recombinant  factor  VIII.  Life-threatening  bleeds  (eg 
obstructing airway) need levels of 100%. Genetic counselling: OHCS p154.
Haemophilia  B (Christmas  disease) Factor  IX deﬁ ciency (inherited,  X-linked re-
cessive); behaves clinically like haemophilia A. Treat with recombinant factor IX.
Acquired haemophilia is a bleeding diathesis causing big mucosal bleeds in males 
and females caused by suddenly appearing autoantibodies that interfere with factor 
VIII.  Tests: APPT; VIII autoantibody; factor VIII activity <50%. : Steroids.
Liver disease Produces a complicated bleeding disorder with synthesis of clot-
ting factors, absorption of vitamin K, and abnormalities of platelet function.
Malabsorption Leads to less uptake of vitamin K (needed for synthesis of factors 
II,  VII,  IX, and  X). Treat with  IV vitamin  K (10mg). In acute haemorrhage, use hu-
man prothrombin complex or FFP.

_OHCM_10e.indb   344

_OHCM_10e.indb   344

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

345

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.42  Intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of coagulation (simpliﬁ ed!).

Fig  8.43  Mild  haemo-
ph ilia  after  an  IM  inj-
ect ion.  Give  vac cines 
etc SC!
©Crookston collection 53.

Fibrinolysis
The  ﬁ brinolytic  system  works  by  generating  plasmin,  which  causes  ﬁ brin 
dissolution.  The  process  starts  with  the  release  of  tissue  plasminogen  activa-
tor  (t-PA)  from  endothelial  cells,  a  process  stimulated  by  ﬁ brin  formation.  t-PA 
converts inactive plasminogen to plasmin which can then cleave ﬁ brin, as well 
as  several  other  factors.  t-PA  and  plasminogen  both  bind  ﬁ brin  thus  localizing 
ﬁ brinolysis to the area of the clot.
Fibrinolytic agents activate this system and can be utilized in order to break 
down pathological thrombi, eg in: acute MI, acute ischaemic stroke, DVT, PE, and 
central retinal venous or arterial thrombosis. In all cases the risk of adverse 
eff ects of thrombolysis (eg haemorrhage) must be outweighed by the poten-
tial  beneﬁ ts.  Streptokinase,  a  streptococcal  exotoxin  that  binds  and  activates 
plasminogen, was the ﬁ rst licensed agent but risks anaphylaxis on repeat dosing. 
Alteplase is recombinant t-PA. Newer agents include tenecteplase and reteplase.

Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) 
ITP is caused by antiplatelet auto anti bodies. It is acute (usually in children, 2wks 
after  infection  with  sudden  self-limiting  purpura:  OHCS  p197)  or  chronic  (seen 
mainly  in  women).  Chronic  ITP  runs  a  ﬂ uctuating  course  of  bleeding,  purpura 
(esp. dependent pressure areas), epistaxis, and menorrhagia. There is no spleno-
megaly.  Tests:  Megakaryocytes  in  marrow,  antiplatelet  autoantibodies  often 
present.  :  None  if  mild.  If  symptomatic  or  platelets  <20  ≈ 109/L,  prednisolone 
1mg/kg/d, and reduce after remission; aim to keep platelets >30 ≈ 109/L—takes a 
few days to work. Platelet transfusions are not used (except during splenecto-
my or life-threatening haemorrhage) as these are quickly destroyed by the au-
toantibodies. IV immunoglobulin may temporarily raise the platelet count, eg for 
surgery,  pregnancy.  If  relapse,  choices  include  splenectomy  or  B-cell  depletion 
with  rituximab.  Eltrombopag  (an  oral  thrombopoietin-receptor  agonist)  and 
romiplostim (an injectable thrombopoietin analogue) are alternative options for 
those with refractory disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   345

_OHCM_10e.indb   345

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

346

An approach to bleeding

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

There are three sets of questions to be answered:
1      Is there an emergency needing immediate resuscitation or senior help?
  • Is the patient about to exsanguinate (dizzy on sitting up, shock, coma)?
  • Is there hypovolaemia (postural hypotension, oliguria)?
  • Is there CNS bleeding (meningism, CNS and retinal signs)?
  • Is there an underlying condition which escalates apparently minor bleeding into 

an evolving catastrophe? For example:

  • Bleeding in pregnancy or the puerperium.
  • GI bleeding in a jaundiced patient (ie coagulation factors already depleted).
  • Bleeding in someone who is already anaemic (esp if other comorbidities).
2      Why is the patient bleeding? Is bleeding normal, given the circumstances (eg 
surgery, trauma, parturition), or does the patient have a bleeding disorder (BOX 
‘Is this pre-op patient at risk of excessive bleeding?’)?
  • Is there a secondary cause, eg drugs (warfarin), alcohol, liver disease, sepsis?
  • Is there unexplained bleeding, bruising, or purpura?
  • Past or family history of excess bleeding, eg during trauma, dentistry, surgery?
  • Is the pattern of bleeding indicative of vascular, platelet, or coagulation prob-
lems (p344)? Are old venepuncture or cannula sites bleeding (DIC, p352)? Look 
for associated conditions (eg with DIC).

  • Is  a  clotting  screen  abnormal  (table  8.3)?  Check  FBC,  platelets,  PT,  APTT,  and 
thrombin time. Consider  D-dimers, bleeding time, and a factor  VIII assay. If 
both  PT and  APTT are  very  raised,  with  low  platelets  and  D-dimers,  consider 
DIC (p352).

3      In cases of bleeding disorders, what is the mechanism? Investigate with 

FBC, ﬁ lm, and coagulation screen (citrate tube; false results if under-ﬁ lled):
  • Prothrombin time (PT): Thromboplastin is added to test the extrinsic system. 
PT is expressed as a ratio compared to control (international normalized ratio 
(INR), normal range = 0.9–1.2). It tests for abnormalities in factors I, II, V, VII, X. 
Prolonged by: warfarin, vitamin K deﬁ ciency, liver disease, DIC.

  • Activated  partial  thrombo plastin  time  (APTT):  Kaolin  is  added  to  test  the 
intrinsic system. Tests for abnormalities in factor I, II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII. Normal 
range 35–45s. Prolonged by: heparin treatment, haemophilia, DIC, liver disease.
  • Thrombin time: Thrombin is added to plasma to convert ﬁ brinogen to ﬁ brin. 
Normal range: 10–15s. Prolonged by: heparin treatment, DIC, dysﬁ brinogenaemia.
  • D-dimers  are  a  ﬁ brin  degradation  product,  released  from  cross-linked  ﬁ b rin 
during ﬁ brinolysis (p345). This occurs during DIC, or in the presence of venous 
thromboembolism—deep  vein  thrombosis  (DVT)  or  pulmonary  embolism  (PE). 
D-dimers may also be raised in inﬂ ammation, eg with infection or malignancy.
Management Depends on the degree of bleeding. If shocked, resuscitate (p790). If 
bleeding continues in the presence of a clotting disorder or a massive transfusion, 
discuss the need for  FFP, cryoprecipitate, factor concentrates, or platelets with a 
haematologist. In ITP (p345), steroids ± IV immunoglobulin may be used. Especially 
in pregnancy (OHCS p88), consult an expert. Is there overdose with anticoagulants 
(p842)? In haemophiliac bleeds, consult early for coagulation factor replacement. 
Never give IM injections.

_OHCM_10e.indb   346

_OHCM_10e.indb   346

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

347

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

INR

Table 8.3  Clotting screen abnormalities in coagulopathies
Disorder
Heparin



DIC
Liver disease

Platelet defect

Vit K deﬁ ciency

Haemophilia

von Willebrand’s 

APTT Thrombin time Platelet count Notes




/









Special tests may be available (factor assays: consult a haematologist).

D-dimer, p346
AST



/





see p344
see p712

Towards a better assay for clotting function 
Bleeding time, a barbaric and unreliable test (the clue is in the name), is no longer 
used. Amongst the range of techniques to replicate the clotting process in vitro is 
thromboelastography (TEG). TEG permits rapid and more precise assays of clotting 
function under massive transfusion situations (eg major surgery, especially trauma). 
In particular, advances in this ﬁ eld have been driven by recent military usage. 

Is this pre-op patient at risk of excessive bleeding?
Take  a  bleeding  history!  The  more  structured  this  is  the  better.   Enquire  about 
factors which may indicate increased bleeding risk, such as:
  • past history of excessive, prolonged, or unexplained bleeding
  • comorbidities such as lupus or liver disease
  • on agents known to aff ect haemostasis.
In such cases, or if bleeding would be disastrous, further tests may be indicated 
after discussion with a haematologist.

_OHCM_10e.indb   347

_OHCM_10e.indb   347

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

348

Blood transfusion and blood products

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Blood should only be given if strictly necessary and there is no alternative. Out-
comes may be worse after an inappropriate transfusion.
  • Know and use local procedures to ensure that the right blood gets to the right 

patient at the right time.

  • Take  blood  for  crossmatching  from  only  one  patient  at  a  time.  Label  immedi-

ately. This minimizes risk of wrong labelling of samples.

  • When giving blood, monitor TPR and BP every ½h.
  • Use a dedicated line where practicable (or dedicated lumen of multilumen line).
Group-and-save (G&S) requests Know your local guidelines for elective surgery. 
Having  crossmatched  blood  to  hand  may  not  be  needed  if  a  blood  sample  is  al-
ready in the lab, with group determined, without any atypical antibodies (ie G&S).
Products2  Whole  blood:  The  only  option  for  the  ﬁ rst  250  years  of  transfusion 
history,  but  now  rarely  used.  Red  cells:  (Packed  to  make  haematocrit  ~70%.)  Use 
to  correct  anaemia  or  blood  loss.  1U  Hb  by  10–15g/L.  In  anaemia,  transfuse  until 
Hb ~80g/L. Platelets: (p364.) Usually only needed if bleeding or count is <20 ≈ 109/L. 
1U should platelet count by >20 ≈ 109/L. Failure to do so suggests refractory cause: 
discuss with haematologist. If surgery is planned, get advice if count is <100 ≈ 109/L. 
Fresh  frozen  plasma  (FFP):  Use  to  correct  clotting  defects:  eg  DIC  (p352);  warfarin 
overdosage where vitamin K would be too slow; liver disease; thrombotic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura (p315). It is expensive and carries all the risks of blood transfu-
sion. Do not use as a simple volume expander. Human albumin solution is produced 
as 4.5% or 20% protein solution and is used to replace protein. 20% albumin can be 
used temporarily in the hypoprotein aemic patient (eg liver disease; nephrosis) who 
is ﬂ uid overloaded, without giving an excessive salt load. Also used as replacement 
in  abdominal  paracentesis  (p765).  Others  Cryoprecipitate  (a  source  of  ﬁ brinogen); 
coag ulation concentrates (self-injected in haemophilia); immunoglobulins.
Complications of transfusion Management of acute reactions:2 see BOX ‘Trans-
fusion reactions’ and table 8.4.
  • Early  (within  24h):  Acute  haemolytic  reactions  (eg  ABO or  Rh  incompatibility); 
anaphylaxis; bacterial contamination; febrile reactions (eg from  HLA antibodies); 
allergic  reactions  (itch,  urticaria,  mild  fever);  ﬂ uid  overload;  transfusion-related 
acute lung injury (TRALI, ie ARDS due to antileucocyte antibodies in donor plasma).
  • Delayed (after 24h): Infections (eg viruses: hepatitis B/C, HIV; bacteria; protozoa; 
prions);  iron  overload  (treatment,  p342);  GVHD;  post-transfusion  purpura—poten-
tially lethal fall in platelet count 5–7d post-transfusion requiring specialist treat-
ment with IV immunoglobulin and platelet transfusions.

Massive  blood  transfusion  This  is  deﬁ ned  as  replacement  of  an  individual’s  en-
tire  blood  volume  (>10U)  within  24h.  Complications:  platelets;  Ca2+;  clotting  fac-
tors;  K+;  hypothermia.  Seek  early  and  ongoing  support  from  haematologist  and 
blood bank who should advise on products and monitoring. In acute haemorrhage, 
use crossmatched blood if possible, but if not, use ‘universal donor’ group O RhΩve 
blood, changing to crossmatched blood as soon as possible.
Transfusing patients with heart failure If Hb 50g/L with heart failure, trans-
fusion with packed red cells is vital to restore Hb to a safe level, eg 60–80g/L, but 
must be done with care. Give each unit over 4h with furosemide (eg 40mg slow 
IV/PO;  don’t  mix  with  blood)  with  alternate  units.  Check  for  JVP  and  basal  lung 
crackles; consider CVP line.
Autologous  transfusion  There  is  a  role  for  patients  having  their  own  blood 
stored pre-op for later use. Erythropoietin (EPO, p304) can increase the yield of au-
tologous blood in normal people. Intraoperative cell salvage with retransfusion is 
also being used more often, especially in cardiac, vascular, and emergency surgery, 
Cost-analysis shows that it may be worthwhile on an economic basis alone.

_OHCM_10e.indb   348

_OHCM_10e.indb   348

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Transfusion reactions
All UK blood products are now leucocyte-depleted (white cells <5≈106/L) so as to 
reduce  the  incidence  of  complications  such  as  alloimmunization  to  HLA  class  I 
antigens and febrile transfusion reactions.
Table 8.4  Management of transfusion reactions

349

Acute haemolytic reaction
(eg ABO incompatibility) Agitat ion, T° 
(rapid onset), BP, ﬂ u shing, abdominal/
chest pain, ooz ing venepuncture sites, DIC.

Anaphylaxis
Bronchospasm, cyanosis, BP, soft tissue 
swelling.
Bacterial contamination
T° (rapid onset), BP, and rigors.

TRALI (See p348) Dyspnoea, cough; CXR 
‘white out’.

Non-haemolytic febrile trans fusion 
reaction
Shivering and fever usually ½–1h after 
starting transfusion.
Allergic reactions
Urticaria and itch.
Fluid overload
Dyspnoea, hypoxia, tachycardia, JVP and 
basal crepitations.

STOP transfusion. Check identity and 
name on unit; tell haematologist; send 
unit + FBC, U&E, clotting, cultures, & urine 
(haemo globinuria) to lab. Keep IV line 
open with 0.9% saline. Treat DIC (p352).
STOP the transfusion. Maintain airway 
and give oxygen. Contact anaesthetist. 
See p794.

STOP the transfusion. Check identity 
against name on unit; tell haematologist 
and send unit + FBC, U&E, clotting, cultures 
& urine to lab. Start broad-spectrum 
antibiotics.
STOP the transfusion. Give 100% O2. 
Treat as ARDS, p186. Donor should be 
removed from donor panel.
SLOW or STOP the transfusion. Give an 
anti pyretic, eg paracetamol 1g. Monitor 
closely. If recurrent, use WBC ﬁ lter.

SLOW or STOP the transfusion; chlorphen-
amine 10mg slow IV/IM. Monitor closely.

SLOW or STOP the transfusion. Give oxygen 
and a diuretic, eg furosemide 40mg IV 
initially. Consider CVP line.

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Blood transfusion and Jehovah’s Witnesses
Adult human beings (with mental ‘capacity’ see p568) have an absolute right to re-
fuse any medical treatment, even if to do so seems illogical or could result in their 
death. To treat patients despite such a refusal would amount to battery under 
common law, or could even amount to a degrading act or torture, against which 
the European Convention on Human Rights gives absolute, inalienable protection.
The biblical verse ‘no soul of you shall eat blood’ (Leviticus 17:12) is one of sev-
eral that have been interpreted by some religious groups to extend to acceptance 
of blood products in a medical context. Jehovah’s Witnesses, for example, may 
refuse potentially vital blood transfusions on such grounds. These views must be 
respected, but complex issues arise if the patient is a child, or an adult who may 
not be able to give or withhold consent in an informed way. In an immediately 
life-threatening situation where further delay may cause harm, treatment such 
as blood products may be given in the child’s best interest, but the team should 
always involve senior paediatricians and hospital ethicists where practical. If the 
requirement is less immediate, then the clinicians should seek further legal advice, 
which might involve approaching the Courts. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   349

_OHCM_10e.indb   349

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

350

Anticoagulants

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Main indications
  • Therapeutic: Venous thromboembolic disease: DVT and PE.
  • Prophylactic: Prevention of DVT/PE in high-risk patients (p375), eg post-op.

Prevention of stroke, eg in chronic AF or prosthetic heart valves.

Heparin 1 Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH): Eg dalteparin, enoxaparin, tinzapa-
rin. The preferred option in the prevention and initial treatment of venous thromboem-
bolism. Inactivates factor Xa (but not thrombin). t½ is 2- to 4-fold longer than standard 
heparin, and response is more predictable: only needs to be given once or twice daily 
SC, and laboratory monitoring is usually not required. See BNF for doses. It accumulates 
in renal failure: decrease dose for prophylaxis, use UFH for therapeutic treatment
2 Unfractionated heparin (UFH): IV or SC. Binds antithrombin (an endogenous in-
hibitor of coagulation), increasing its ability to inhibit thrombin, factor Xa, and IXa. 
Rapid onset and has a short t½. Monitor and adjust dose with APTT (p346).
SE for both: Bleeding (eg at operative site, gastrointestinal, intracranial), heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), osteoporosis with long-term use.  HIT and osteo-
porosis are less common with LMWH than UFH. Beware hyperkalaemia.
CI:  Bleeding  disorders,  platelets  <60≈109/L,  previous  HIT,  peptic  ulcer,  cerebral 
haemorrhage, severe hypertension, neurosurgery.
Warfarin  Used  PO  OD  as  long-term  anticoagulation.  The  therapeutic  range  is  nar-
row,  varying  with  the  condition  being  treated  (see  BOX  ‘Warfarin  guidelines  and 
target levels for INR’)—and eff ects are reﬂ ected in the INR. Warfarin inhibits the re-
ductase enzyme responsible for regenerating the active form of vitamin K, producing 
a state analogous to vitamin K deﬁ ciency. CI: Peptic ulcer, bleeding disorders, severe 
hypertension,  pregnancy  (teratogenic,  see  OHCS  p640).  Use  with  caution  in  elderly 
and  those  with  past  GI  bleeds.  In  the  UK,  warfarin  tablets  are  0.5mg  (white),  1mg 
(brown), 3mg (blue), or 5mg (pink). Interactions: p757.
DOACS  (Direct  oral  anticoagulants.)  Rivaroxaban,  apixaban  (factor  Xa  inhibitors) 
and dabigatran (a direct thrombin inhibitor) do not require regular monitoring and 
dose adjustment; just a quarterly assessment and annual blood test. They off er an 
attractive alternative to warfarin (particularly where monitoring and maintaining 
a therapeutic INR is diffi  cult). CI: severe renal/liver impairment; active bleeding; le-
sion at risk of bleeding; clotting factors. Interactions: heparin, clopidogrel.
Others Fondaparinux is a pentasaccharide Xa inhibitor and is used in acute coro-
nary syndrome or in place of LMWH for prophylaxis.
Beginning therapeutic anticoagulation (Follow local guidelines, and see BNF.)
For treatment of venous thromboembolism, LMWH or UFH are typically used initially. 
When transitioning to warfarin, give heparin in combination (as early as day 1) and 
continue until INR is in target therapeutic range on 2 consecutive days (see BOX ‘War-
farin dosage’). Start warfarin at 5–10mg given at 18.00 on days 1 and 2, then check INR 
on day 3 (it takes 48–72h for anticoagulant eff ect to develop). Adjust subsequent doses 
according to the INR (see table 8.5), which needs to be measured on alternate days until 
stable, then weekly or less often. When transitioning to a DOAC switch from heparin (ie 
do not coadminister DOAC and heparin). DOACS and warfarin may both be initiated as 
monotherapy in chronic AF (DOACS also in less extensive thromboembolism).
Antidotes If UFH overdose: stop infusion. If there is bleeding, protamine sulphate 
counteracts  UFH:  discuss  with  a  haematologist.  Warfarin:  see  BOX  ‘Warfarin  dos-
age’  and  table  8.6.  DOACS:  challenging  and  evolving  area  (including  monoclonal 
anti-drug antibodies eg idarucizumab for dabigatran)—discuss with haematologist. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   350

_OHCM_10e.indb   350

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Warfarin guidelines and target levels for INR
  • Pulmonary  embolism  and  DVT.  Aim  for  INR  of  2–3;  3.5  if  recurrent  PE  or  DVT 

351

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

whilst anticoagulated.

  • Atrial ﬁ brillation: for stroke prevention (p130). Target INR 2–3.
  • Prosthetic metallic heart valves: for stroke prevention. Target INR 2–3 if aortic 

valve or 2.5–3.5 if mitral valve.

Duration of anticoagulation in DVT/PE: First episodes of DVT or PE require at least 
3 months of anticoagulation. Consider extending this to 6 months in patients with 
more extensive, life-threatening clot at presentation, for those with transient but 
persistent risk factors (eg prolonged immobility) or if evidence of persistent clot 
at 3 months. For those with recurrent unprovoked emboli or underlying throm-
bophilia (p374), consider bleeding risks against beneﬁ ts of indeﬁ nite treatment.

Warfarin dosage and what to do when the INR is much too high
Below is a rough guide to warfarin dosing for target INR of 2–3.
Table 8.5  Suggested dosing for day 3 of warfarin loading

INR
3rd dose
Maintenance

<2
5mg
≥6mg

2
5mg
5.5mg

2.5
4mg
4.5mg

2.9
3mg
4mg

3.3
2mg
3.5mg

3.6
0.5mg
3mg

4.1
0mg
*

Table 8.6  When the INR is much too high (see also BNF)

*Miss a dose; give 1–2mg the next day; if INR >4.5, miss 2 doses.

INR  5–8, no bleed

INR  5–8, minor bleed*

INR  >8, no bleed

NR  >8, minor bleed*

Any major 
bleed (including 
intracranial 
haemorrhage)

Withold 1–2 doses. Restart warfarin at a lower mainta-
nence dose once INR <5.
Stop warfarin and admit for urgent IV vitamin K (give 
slowly). Restart warfarin when INR <5.
Stop warfarin and seek haematology advice.
Stop warfarin and admit for urgent IV vitamin K. Check INR 
daily—repeat vitamin K if INR too high after 24h. Restart 
warfarin at a lower dose when INR <5.
Stop warfarin. Give prothrombin complex concentrate 50 
units/kg (if unavailable, give FFP 15mL/kg ≈ 1L for a 70kg 
man) and 5–10mg vitamin K IV. Discuss with haematologist.

*Minor bleeding includes epistaxis.

Vitamin K may take several hours to work and can cause prolonged resistance 
when restarting warfarin, so should be avoided if possible when long-term anti-
coagulation is needed. Prothrombin complex concentrate contains a concentrate 
of factors  II, VII, IX, and  X and provides a more complete and rapid reversal of 
warfarin than FFP.

_OHCM_10e.indb   351

_OHCM_10e.indb   351

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

352

Leukaemia and the on-call junior doctor

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Leukaemia divides into four main types depending on the cell line involved (table 8.7).
Table 8.7  Principal subtypes of leukaemia

Acute
Chronic

Lymphoid
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)

Myeloid
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML)

These  patients  (esp.  AML)  fall  ill  suddenly  and  deteriorate  fast,  eg  with: 
infection,  ble  eding  (:  platelets  ±  FFP),  and  hyperviscosity  (p372).  Take 
non-speciﬁ c confusion/drowsiness or just ‘I feel a bit ill today’ seriously: do blood 
cultures,  FBC,  U&E,  LFT,  Ca2+,  glucose,  and  clotting.  Consider  CNS  bleeding—CT  if  in 
doubt. With any new patient, ﬁ nd out the agreed aim of treatment: cure; prolong-
ing  disease-free  survival;  or  palliation  with  minimal  toxicity?  Direct  your  eff orts 
accordingly; get help if lack of clarity here.
Neutropenic  regimen  (For  when  neutrophil  count  ≤0.5  ≈  109/L.)3  Close  liaison 
with a microbiologist and haematologist is vital. Abide by infection control proce-
dures! Use a risk-assessment tool (eg MASCC, see BOX). 
  • Full barrier nursing in a side room if possible. Hand-washing is vital.
  • Avoid IM injections (danger of an infected haematoma).
  • Look for infection (mouth, axillae, perineum, IVI site). Take swabs.
  • Check: FBC, platelets, INR, U&E, LFT, LDH, CRP. Take cultures (blood ≈3—peripherally 

± Hickman line; urine, sputum, stool if diarrhoea); CXR if clinically indicated.

  • Wash  perineum  after  defecation.  Swab  moist  skin  with  chlorhexidine.  Avoid 
unnecessary  rectal  examinations.  Oral  hygiene  (eg  hydrogen  peroxide  mouth 
washes/2h) and Candida prophylaxis are important (p246).

  • Check vital signs 4-hrly. High-calorie diet; avoid foods with high risk of microbial 

contamination. Vases containing cut ﬂ owers pose a Pseudomonas risk.
Use of antibiotics in neutropenia Treat any known infection promptly.
  • If  T°  >38°C  or  T°  >37.5°C  on  two  occasions,  >1h  apart,  or  the  patient  is  septic, 
start  blind  combination  therapy  according  to  local  guidelines—eg  piperacillin–
tazobactam—p386 (+ vancomycin, p386, if Gram +ve organisms suspected or iso-
lated, eg Hickman line sepsis). Continue until afebrile for 72h or 5d course, and 
until  neutro phils  >0.5≈109/L.  If  fever  persists  despite  antibiotics,  think  of  CMV, 
fungi (eg Candida; Aspergillus, p408) and central line infection.

  • Consider treatment for Pneumocystis (p400, eg co-trimoxazole, though beware as 

this can worsen neutropenia). Remember TB.

Other dangers •Tumour lysis syndrome: Results in K+,  urate, and AKI. See p529.
  • Hyperviscosity:  (p372).  If  WCC  is  >100 ≈ 109/L  WBC  thrombi  may  form  in  brain, 
lung,  and  heart  (leukostasis).  Avoid  transfusing  before  lowering  WCC,  eg  with 
hydroxycarbamide or leukaph eresis, as viscosity rises (risk of leukostasis).

  • DIC: The release of procoagulants into the circulation causes widespread activa-
tion of coagulation, consuming clotting factors and platelets and causing risk of 
bleeding. Fibrin strands ﬁ ll small vessels, haemolysing passing  RBCs. Fibrinolysis 
is  also  activated.  Causes:  Malignancy,  sepsis,  trauma,  obstetric  events.  Signs: 
(ﬁ g  8.44)  Bruising,  bleeding  anywhere  (eg  vene puncture  sites),  renal  failure. 
Tests: Platelets; PT; APTT; ﬁ brinogen (correlates with severity); ﬁ brin degra-
dation products (D-dimers). Film: broken RBCS (schisto cytes). : Treat the cause. 
Replace  platelets  if  <50≈109/L,  cryoprecipitate  to  replace  ﬁ brinogen,  FFP  to  re-
place  coagulation  factors.  Heparin  is  controversial.  The  use  of  all-transretinoic 
acid  (ATRA)  has  signiﬁ cantly  reduced  the  risk  of  DIC in  acute  pro myelocytic  leu-
kaemia (the commonest leukaemia associated with DIC).

  • Preventing sepsis: Give ﬂ uoroquinolone (eg ciproﬂ oxacin) before neutropenia gets 
serious. Granulocyte colony stimulators (G-CSF) can increase the production of WBCs 
(granulocytes)  from  bone  marrow,  but  should  not  be  given  routinely  in  chemo-
therapy. Herpes, pneumocystis, and CMV prophylaxis has a role.

_OHCM_10e.indb   352

_OHCM_10e.indb   352

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

MASCC score
The  Multinational  Association  for  Supportive  Care  in  Cancer  (MASCC)  assess-
ment tool can be used to predict the risk of serious complications in febrile neu-
tropaenia, and can inform management decisions: if the total score is 21, risk 
of septic complications is low and admission may be avoided.
  • Solid tumour or lymphoma with no previous fungal infection  4
  • Outpatient status at onset of fever (not needing admission) 
3
  • Age <60yrs  
2
  • Burden of illness:

  • Mild (or no) symptoms 
  • Moderate symptoms 
  •  Severe symptoms 

  • No hypotension (systolic BP >90mmHg) 
  • No COPD 
  • No dehydration 
Note the subjectivity of the ‘burden of illness’ and the omission of potentially vital 
variables such as CRP (which, should it fail to fall after starting antibiotics predicts 
treatment failure). As with all other scores, the MASCC score should therefore be 
interpreted within the context of the individual clinical picture.

5
3
0
5
4
3

353

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.44  The  appearance  of  disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC) on the sole.

Courtesy of the Crookston Collection.

_OHCM_10e.indb   353

_OHCM_10e.indb   353

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
354

Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

A malignancy of lymphoid cells, aff ecting B- or T-lymphocyte cell lineages, arresting 
maturation and promoting uncontrolled proliferation of immature blast cells, with 
marrow  failure  and  tissue  inﬁ ltration.  Ionizing  radiation  (eg  X-rays)  during  preg-
nancy, and Down’s syndrome are important associations.  It is the commonest cancer 
of childhood, and is rare in adults. CNS involvement is common.
Classiﬁ cation Based on three systems:
1      Morphological: The FAB system (French, American, British) divides ALL into three types 
(L1, L2, L3) by microscopic appearance. Provides limited information (ﬁ gs 8.45–8.48).

2      Immunological: Surface markers are used to classify ALL into:

• Precursor B-cell ALL • T-cell ALL • B-cell ALL.

3      Cytogenetic: Chromosomal analysis. Abnormalities are detected in up to 85%, 
which  are  often  translocations.6  Useful  for  predicting  prognosis,  eg  poor  with 
Philadelphia chromosome (p358), and for detecting disease recurrence.

Signs and symptoms (ﬁ g 8.49) Due to:
  • Marrow failure: anaemia (Hb), infection (WCC), and bleeding (platelets).
  • Inﬁ ltration:  hepato-  and  splenomegaly,  lymphadenopathy—superﬁ cial  or  medi-
astinal, orchidomegaly, CNS involvement—eg cranial nerve palsies, meningism.
Common  infections:  Especially  chest,  mouth,  perianal,  and  skin.  Bacterial  septi-
caemia, zoster, CMV, measles, candidiasis, Pneumocystis pneumonia (p400).
Tests • Characteristic blast cells on blood ﬁ lm and bone marrow. WCC usually high.
  • CXR and CT scan to look for mediastinal and abdominal lymphadenopathy.
  • Lumbar puncture should be performed to look for CNS involvement.
Treatment Educate and motivate patient to promote engagement with therapy.
  • Support: Blood/platelet transfusion,  IV ﬂ uids, allopurinol (prevents tumour lysis 

syndrome). Insert a subcutaneous port system/Hickman line for IV access. 

  • Infections: These are dangerous, due to neutropenia caused by the disease and 
treatment: give immediate IV antibiotics. Start the neutropenic regimen (p352) and 
give prophylactic antivirals, antifungals, and antibiotics.

  • Chemotherapy: Complex multi-drug, multi-phase regimens that may take years:

  • Remission induction: eg vincristine, prednisolone, L-asparaginase + daunorubicin.
  • Consolidation: high-medium-dose therapy in ‘blocks’ over several weeks.
  • CNS prophylaxis: intrathecal (or high-dose IV) methotrexate ± CNS irradiation.
  • Maintenance: prolonged chemotherapy, eg mercaptopurine (daily), methotrex-
ate (weekly), and vincristine + prednisolone (monthly) for 2yrs. Relapse is common 
in blood, CNS, or testis (examine these sites at follow-up). More details: OHCS p194.
  • Matched related allogeneic marrow transplantations: Once in 1st remission is 

the best option in standard-risk younger adults.

Haematological remission: Means no evidence of leukaemia in the blood, a normal 
or recovering blood count, and <5% blasts in a normal regenerating marrow.
Prognosis Cure rates for children are 70–90%; for adults only 40% (higher when 
imatinib/rituximab, p358, are used). Poor prognosis if: adult, male, Philadelphia chro-
mosome (p358: BCR–ABL gene fusion due to translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22), 
presentation with CNS signs, Hb , WCC >100≈109/L , or B-cell ALL. PCR is used to detect 
minimal residual disease, undetectable by standard means. Prognosis in relapsed 
Ph-negative ALL is poor (but improvable by marrow transplant). 
Personalized treatment One size does not ﬁ t all!  Aim to tailor therapy to the 
exact gene defect, and according to individual metabolism. Monoclonal antibodies, 
gene-targeted retinoids, cytokines, vaccines, and T-cell infusions are relevant here.  
Biomarkers, eg thiopurine methyltransferase, can predict toxicity from thiopurines. 

6  Eg t(12:21) ETV6-RUNX1, t(1;19) TCF3-PBX1, t(9;22) BCR-ABL1, and rearrangement of MLL.

_OHCM_10e.indb   354

_OHCM_10e.indb   354

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

355

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.45  Blood  ﬁ lm  in  ALL,  L1  subtype.  Small 
blasts with scanty cytoplasm.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.46  Bone marrow in ALL, L1 subtype.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.47  Blood ﬁ lm in ALL,  L2 subtype. Larger 
blast cells with greater morphological var iation 
and more abundant cytoplasm.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.48  ALL  L3. Blasts with vacuolated baso-
philic cytoplasm. A and B: blood ﬁ lms. C: lymph 
node.

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇlu.

Fig  8.49  Bilateral  parotid  inﬁ ltration  in  ALL. 
(Enlarged  salivary  glands  are  also  seen  in 
mumps, HIV, bulimia, myxoedema, etc., p594.)

_OHCM_10e.indb   355

_OHCM_10e.indb   355

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

356

Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Neoplastic  proliferation  of  blast  cells  derived  from  marrow  myeloid  elements.  It 
progresses rapidly (death in ~2 months if untreated; ~20% 3yr survival after ).
Incidence The commonest acute leukaemia of adults (1/10 000/yr; increases with 
age). AML can be a long-term complication of chemotherapy, eg for lymphoma. Also 
associated with myelodysplastic states (see BOX ‘Myelodysplastic syndromes’), ra-
diation, and syndromes, eg Down’s.
Morphological classiﬁ cation There is much heterogeneity (see BOX ‘Heterogene-
ity in AML’). Four types based on WHO histological classiﬁ cation, cytogenetics, and 
molecular genetics:
1      AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities.
2      AML multilineage dysplasia (eg 2° to pre-existing myelodysplastic syndrome).
3      AML, therapy related (in those previously treated with cytotoxic drugs).
4      AML, other (not ﬁ tting above-listed; further subclassiﬁ ed as M0–M7 by maturation).
Signs and symptoms • Marrow failure: Anaemia, infection, or bleeding. DIC oc-
curs in acute promyelocytic leukaemia, a subtype of AML, where there is release of 
thromboplastin (p352). • Inﬁ ltration: Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, gum hypertro-
phy (ﬁ g 8.50), skin involvement. CNS involvement at presentation is rare.
Diagnosis WCC is often , but can be normal or even low. Blast cells may be few 
in  the  peripheral  blood,  so  diagnosis  depends  on  bone  marrow  biopsy,  immuno-
phenotyping, and molecular methods. On biopsy, AML is diff erentiated from ALL by 
Auer rods (ﬁ gs 8.51– 8.53). Cytogenetic analysis (eg type of mutation) guides treat-
ment recommendations and prognosis.
Complications  • Predisposition  to  infection  by  both  the  disease  and  the  treat-
ment; may be bacterial, fungal, or viral—prophylaxis is given for each during ther-
apy.  Be  alert  to  septicaemia  (p352):  common  organisms  present  oddly  and  rare 
organisms can infect commonly (particularly the fungi Candida and Aspergillus). 
Be aware that AML itself causes fever. • Chemotherapy causes plasma urate levels 
(from tumour lysis)—so give allopurinol with chemotherapy, and keep well hydrat-
ed with IV ﬂ uids. • Leukostasis (p352) may occur if WCC.
Treatment • Supportive care: As for ALL. Walking exercises can relieve fatigue. 
  • Chemotherapy: Very intensive, resulting in long periods of marrow suppression 
with  neutropenia  +  platelets  .  The  main  drugs  used  include  daunorubicin  and 
cyt arabine, with ~5 cycles given in 1-week blocks to get a remission (RAS muta-
tions occur in ~20% of patients with AML and enhance sensitivity to cytarabine). 
  • Bone marrow transplant (BMT): Pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells are col-
lected from the marrow. Allogeneic transplants from HLA-matched donors (held 
on international databases) are indicated in refractory or relapsing disease. The 
idea is to destroy leuk aemic cells and the immune system by, eg cyclophospha-
mide  +  total  body  irradiation,  then  repopulate  the  marrow  with  donor  cells  in-
fused  IV.  Ciclosporin  ±  methotrexate  are  used  to  reduce  the  eff ect  of  the  new 
marrow attacking the patient’s body (GVHD).

  • Complications: GVHD (may help explain the curative eff ect of BMT); opportunis-

tic infections; relapse of leukaemia; infertility.

  • Prognosis: Lower relapse rates ~60% long-term survivors, but signiﬁ cant mor-
tality of ~10%. Autologous BMT (where stem cells are taken from the patient 
themselves) is used in intermediate prognosis disease, although some studies 
suggest better survival rates with intensive chemotherapy regimens.

  • Autologous mobilized peripheral blood stem cell transplantation may off er 

faster haemopoietic recovery and less morbidity. 

  • Supportive care, or lower-dose chemotherapy for disease control, may be more 
appropriate in elderly patients, where intensive therapies have poorer outcomes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   356

_OHCM_10e.indb   356

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

357

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.50  Gum hypertrophy in AML.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.51  Auer rods (crystals of coalesced gran-
ules) found in AML myeloblast cells.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.52  AML with monoblasts and myelo blasts 
on the peripheral blood ﬁ lm.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.53  Marrow in AML: multiple monoblasts.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS, myelodysplasia)
These are a heterogeneous group of disorders that manifest as marrow failure 
with risk of life-threatening infection and bleeding (median survival varies from 
6 months to 6 years according to disease type). Mostly primary, but can develop 
secondary to chemotherapy or radiotherapy. 30% transform to acute leukaemia. 
Tests: Pancytopenia (p364), with reticulocyte count. Marrow cellularity is usu-
ally increased due to ineff ective haematopoiesis. Ring sideroblasts may also be 
seen in the marrow (ﬁ g 8.9, p327).
Treatment:
  • Multiple transfusions of red cells or platelets as needed.
  • Erythropoietin ± G-CSF (p352) may lower transfusion requirement.
  • Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is one option (curative but often inappro-

priate owing to age-related comorbidities—most are >70yrs old).

  • Low-intensity treatments that are not curative but may improve quality of life 
in symptomatic disease include thalidomide analogues (eg lenalidomide) or hy-
pomethylating agents (eg azacitidine and decitabine).

Heterogeneity in AML
Consider four types of heterogeneity as we move through medical history: mor-
phologic, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and molecular. Genomic technologies 
enable an ever more detailed molecular analysis of AML and this can be used to in-
form prognosis and guide risk stratiﬁ cation. Epigenetic and other proﬁ ling reveals 
more and more biomarkers, eg mutations in the genes encoding DNA (cytosine-5)-
methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A).

_OHCM_10e.indb   357

_OHCM_10e.indb   357

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

358

Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML)

CML is characterized by an uncontrolled clonal proliferation of myeloid cells (ﬁ g 8.54). 
It accounts for 15% of leukaemias. It is a myeloproliferative disorder (p366) having 
features  in  common  with  these  diseases,  eg  splenomegaly.  It  occurs  most  often 
between 40–60yrs, with a slight male predominance, and is rare in childhood.
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) Present in >80% of those with CML. It is a hybrid 
chromosome comprising reciprocal translocation between the long arm of chromo-
some  9  and  the  long  arm  of  chromosome  22—t(9;22)—forming  a  fusion  gene  BCR/
ABL on chromosome 22, which has tyrosine kinase activity. Those without Ph have a 
worse prognosis. Some patients have a masked translocation—cytogenetics do not 
show the Ph, but the rearrangement is detectable by molecular techniques.
Symptoms Mostly chronic and insidious: weight, tiredness, fever, sweats. There 
may be features of gout (due to purine breakdown), bleeding (platelet dysfunction), 
and abdominal discomfort (splenic enlargement). ~30% are detected by chance.
Signs Splenomegaly (>75%)—often massive. Hepatomegaly, anaemia, bruising (ﬁ g 8.55).
Tests WBC (often >100≈109/L) with whole spectrum of myeloid cells, ie neutro-
phils,  monocytes,  basophils,  eosinophils.  Hb  or  ,  platelets  variable.  Urate,  B12. 
Bone marrow hypercellular. Cytogenetic analysis of blood or bone marrow for Ph.
Natural history Variable, median survival 5–6yrs. There are three phases: Chronic, 
lasting months or years of few, if any, symptoms. • Accelerated phase, with increas-
ing symptoms, spleen size, and diffi  culty in controlling counts. • Blast transforma-
tion, with features of acute leukaemia ± death. Treatment See BOX.

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.54  CML:  numerous  granulocytic  cells  at 
diff erent stages of diff erentiation.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.55  Hepatosplenomegaly in CML.

Treating CML
CML  is  the  ﬁ rst  example  of  a  cancer  where  knowledge  of  the  genotype  has  led 
to a speciﬁ cally targeted drug—imatinib, a BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor. This 
has transformed therapy over the last 10yrs.  Side eff ects are usually mild: nausea, 
cramps, oedema, rash, headache, arthralgia. May cause myelosuppression.

More potent 2nd-generation BCR-ABL inhibitors: dasatinib, nilotinib, bosutinib, 
and  ponatinib.  Dasatinib  and  nilotinib  allow  more  patients  to  achieve  deeper, 
more  rapid  responses  associated  with  improved  outcomes,  and  dasatinib  has 
been used in imatinib-resistant blast crises (though NICE says that it is often not 
cost-eff ective). Hydroxycarbamide is also used.

Those  with  lymphoblastic  trans formation  may  beneﬁ t  from  treatment  as 
for  ALL.  Treatment  of  myeloblastic  transformation  with  chemotherapy  rarely 
achieves lasting remission, and allo geneic transplantation off ers the best hope.

Stem cell transplantation. Allogeneic transplantation from an HLA-matched sib-
ling or unrelated donor off ers the only cure, but carries signiﬁ cant morbidity and 
mortality. Guidelines suggest that this approach should be only rarely used 1st line 
in young patients (where mortality rates are lower). Other patients should be of-
fered a BCR-ABL inhibitor. Patients are then reviewed annually to decide whether to 
continue, to off er combination therapy or stem cell transplantation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   358

_OHCM_10e.indb   358

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)

359

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

CLL is the commonest leukaemia (>25%; incidence: ~5/100 000/yr). :≈2:1. The hall-
mark is progressive accumulation of a malignant clone of functionally incompetent 
B cells. Mutations, trisomies, and deletions (eg del17p13) in ﬂ uence risk (table 8.8).
Table 8.8  Staging and survival in CLL
Rai stage: 

0 Lymphocytosis alone
I Lymphocytosis + lymphadenopathy 
II Lymphocytosis + spleno- or hepatomegaly
III Lymphocytosis + anaemia (Hb <110g/L)
IV Lymphocytosis + platelets <100 ≈ 109/L

Median survival >13yrs
8yrs
5yrs
2yrs
1yr

Symptoms Often none, presenting as a surprise ﬁ nding on a routine FBC. Patients 
may be anaemic or infection-prone, or have weight, sweats, anorexia if severe.
Signs Enlarged, rubbery, non-tender nodes (ﬁ g 8.56). Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly.
Tests  Lymphocytes—may  be  marked  (ﬁ g  8.57).  Later:  autoimmune  haemolysis 
(p338), marrow inﬁ ltration: Hb, neutrophils, platelets.
Complications 1 Autoimmune haemolysis. 2 Infection due to hypogammaglobuli-
naemia (=IgG), bacterial, viral especially herpes zoster. 3 Marrow failure.
Treatment Consider drugs if symptomatic. Fludarabine + rituximab ± cyclophos-
phamide is 1st line (there is synergism). Ibrutinib, chlorambucil, bendamustine, and 
ofatumumab all have a role. Steroids help autoimmune haemolysis. Radiotherapy 
helps  lymphadenopathy  and  splenomegaly.  Stem-cell  transplantation  may  have 
a role in carefully selected patients. Supportive care: Transfusions, IV human im-
munoglobulin if recurrent infection.
Natural  history ⅓ never progress (or even regress), ⅓ progress slowly, and ⅓ pro-
gress actively. CD23 and 2 microglobulin correlate with bulk of disease and rates of 
progression. Death is often due to infection or transformation to aggressive lym-
phoma (Richter’s syndrome).

Fig  8.56  Bilateral  cervical  lymphadenopathy 
in CLL.

Fig 8.57  CLL: many lymphocytes and a ‘smear’ 
cell: a fragile cell damaged in preparation.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

_OHCM_10e.indb   359

_OHCM_10e.indb   359

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
 
 
 
360

Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Lymphomas are disorders caused by malignant proliferations of lymphocytes. These 
accumulate in the lymph nodes causing lymphadenopathy, but may also be found in pe-
ripheral blood or inﬁ ltrate organs. Lymphomas are histologically divided into Hodgkin’s 
and non-Hodgkin’s types. In Hodgkin’s lymphoma,7 characteristic cells with mirror-im-
age nuclei are found, called Reed–Sternberg cells (ﬁ gs 8.58–8.60).
Incidence Two peaks: young adults (HL is the commonest malignancy in 15–24yr olds) and 
elderly. : ≈ 2:1. Risk factors: An aff ected sibling; EBV (p405); SLE; post-transplantation .
Symptoms  Often  presents  with  enlarged,  non-tender,  ‘rubbery’  superﬁ cial  lymph 
nodes (60–70% cervical, ﬁ g 8.61, also axillary or inguinal). Node size may ﬂ uctuate, 
and they can become matted. 25% have constitutional upset, eg fever, weight loss, 
night sweats, pruritus, and lethargy. There may be alcohol-induced lymph node pain. 
Mediastinal lymph node involvement can cause mass eff ect, eg bronchial or SVC ob-
struction (p528), or direct extension, eg causing pleural eff usions.
Signs Lymphadenopathy. Also, cachexia, anaemia, spleno- or hepatomegaly.
Tests Tissue diagnosis: Lymph node excision biopsy if possible. Image-guided nee-
dle biopsy, laparotomy, or mediastinoscopy may be needed. Bloods: FBC, ﬁ lm, ESR, LFT, 
LDH, urate, Ca2+. ESR or Hb indicate a worse prognosis. LDH  as it is released during 
cell turnover. Imaging: CXR, CT/PET of thorax, abdo, and pelvis.
Staging (Ann Arbor system.) Inﬂ uences treatment and prognosis. Done by imaging 
± marrow biopsy if B symptoms, or stage III–IV disease.

I       Conﬁ ned to single lymph node region.
II       Involvement of two or more nodal areas on the same side of the diaphragm.
III      Involvement of nodes on both sides of the diaphragm.
IV       Spread beyond the lymph nodes, eg liver or bone marrow.
Each stage is either ‘A’—no systemic symptoms other than pruritus; or ‘B’—presence 
of B symptoms: weight loss >10% in last 6 months, unexplained fever >38°C, or night 
sweats (needing change of clothes). ‘B’ indicates worse disease. Localized extra-nod-
al extension does not advance the stage, but is indicated by subscripted ‘E’, eg I-AE.
Chemoradiotherapy  Radiotherapy  +  short  courses  of  chemotherapy  for  stages 
I-A and  II-A (eg with ≤3 areas involved). Longer courses of chemotherapy for  II-A 
with >3 areas involved through to IV-B. ‘ABVD’: Adriamycin (doxorubicin), Bleomy-
cin, Vinblastine, Dacarbazine cures ~80% of patients.  More intensive regimens are 
used if poor prognosis or advanced disease.8 In relapsed disease: high-dose chem-
otherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation. 
Complications  of  treatment:  See  pp524–7.  Radiotherapy  may    risk  of  second 
malignancies—solid tumours (especially lung and breast, also melanoma, sarcoma, 
stomach and thyroid cancers), ischaemic heart disease, hypothyroidism, and lung 
ﬁ brosis  due  to  the  radiation  ﬁ eld.  Chemotherapy  SE  include  myelosuppression, 
nausea,  alopecia,  infection.  AML  (p356),  non-Hodgkin’s  lymphoma,  and  infertility 
may be due to both chemo- and radiotherapy—see p525.
5-year survival Depends on stage and grade (table 8.9): >95% in I-A lymphocyte-
predomi nant disease; <40% with IV-B lymphocyte-depleted.
Emergency presentations Infection; SVC obstruction—JVP, sensation of fullness 
in the head, dyspnoea, blackouts, facial oedema (seek expert help; see p528).

7  Thomas Hodgkin (1798–1866); rediscovered by Samuel Wilks (1824–1911) who magnanimously gave the 
disease Hodgkin’s name.
8  Eg  BEACOPP  (bleomycin/etoposide/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/vincristine/procarbazine/prednisone). 
In IIB, III, or IV, BEACOPP gives better initial control, but 7yr event-free survival is similar: 78% vs 71%. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   360

_OHCM_10e.indb   360

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 8.9  HL subtypes
Classiﬁ cation (% of cases)
Nodular sclerosing (70%)
Mixed cellularity* (20–25%)

Prognosis
Good
Good

Lymphocyte rich (5%)
Lymphocyte depleted* (<1%)
NB: nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin’s is recognized as a separate entity, 
behav ing as an indolent B-cell lymphoma. 
*Higher incidence and worse prognosis if HIV +ve.

Good
Poor

361

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.58  A  Reed–Sternberg  cell  with  two 
nuclei, characteristic of Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.59  Another Reed–Sternberg cell.

Courtesy of the Crookston collection.

Fig  8.60  Mononuclear  Reed–Sternberg  cell 
in a lymph node.

Fig 8.61  Cervical lymphadenopathy in Hodg-
kin’s disease.

©Prof. Tangün and Dr Körogˇlu.

Quality of life, lymphoma, and the role of expressive writing
Being treated for Hodgkin’s lymphoma is arduous. Our job is often to give en-
couragement—the more this is personalized for our individual patient the better.
One method is to encourage our patients to write about their experiences. In 
one study this gave clear-cut beneﬁ ts in lymphoma patients. Participants report 
positive responses to writing, and half said that writing changed their thoughts 
about  their  illness  in  a  positive  way  (this  increased  on  subsequent  follow-up). 
Textual  analysis  identiﬁ es  themes  related  to  experiences  of  positive  change, 
transformation,  and  self-affi  rmation  through  reﬂ ection.  These  techniques  are 
akin  to  those  used  in  post-traumatic  stress—and  remind  us  that  some  of  our 
treatments are as destabilizing to our patients as any shipwreck or earthquake. 
‘I can whine, I can complain, I can moan, and bitch, about all of the above, but I 
won’t…. The true feat isn’t escaping death, rather, learning how to live.’

Sometimes narrating lymphoma experiences reveals bitterness, loss of control, 
and a feeling that life has been rendered void. Here our role is to receive these 
negatives and to try to keep the channels of communication open, as dialogue 
is the only validated means of ﬁ lling these voids. The need to enhance support 
networks and bolster social ties may trump all our pharmacological imperatives.

_OHCM_10e.indb   361

_OHCM_10e.indb   361

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

362

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

This includes all lymphomas without Reed–Sternberg cells (p360)—a diverse group. 
Most are derived from B-cell lines; diff use large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is common-
est.  Not all centre on nodes (extranodal tissues generating lymphoma include muco-
sa-associated lymphoid tissue, eg gastric MALT, later in topic). Incidence has doubled 
since 1970 (to 2: 10 000). Causes Immunodeﬁ ciency—drugs; HIV (usually high-grade 
lymphoma from EBV transformed cells, p405); HTLV-1, p405; H. pylori ; toxins; congenital.
Signs and symptoms • Superﬁ cial lymphadenopathy (75% at presentation).
  • Extranodal disease (50%) Gut (commonest): 1 Gastric MALT is caused by H. pylori, 
and may regress with its eradication (p252). Symptoms: as for gastric Ca (p619), 
with systemic features (see below). MALT usually involves the antrum, is multifocal, 
and metastasizes late. 2 Non-MALT gastric lymphomas (60%) are usually diff use 
large-cell  B  lymphomas—high-grade  and  not  responding  well  to  H. pylori  eradi-
cation. 3 Small-bowel lymphomas eg  IPSID (immunoproliferative small intestine 
disease p370), or EATCL (enteropathy/coeliac-associated intra-epithelial T-cell lym-
phoma)—presents  with  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  abdominal  pain,  and  weight.  Poor 
prognosis. Skin: (2nd commonest—see ﬁ g 8.62) Eg clonal T cells in mycosis fungoi-
des (accounts for ~50%—p596). Oropharynx: Waldeyer’s ring lymphoma causes 
sore throat/obstructed breathing. Other possible sites: Bone, CNS, and lung.

  • Systemic features—fever, night sweats, weight loss (less common than in Hodg-

kin’s lymphoma, and indicates disseminated disease).

  • Pancytopenia from marrow involvement—anaemia, infection, bleeding (platelets).
Tests Blood: FBC, U&E, LFT. LDH ≈ worse prognosis, reﬂ ecting cell turnover. Marrow 
and node biopsy for classiﬁ cation (complex, based on the WHO system of high- or 
low-grade). Staging: Ann Arbor system (p360)—CT ± PET of chest, abdomen, pelvis. 
Send cytology of any eff usion; LP for CSF cytology if CNS signs.
Diagnosis/management  is  multidisciplinary,  synthesizing  details  from  clinical 
evaluation, histology, immunology, molecular genetics, and imaging. Generally:
  • Low-grade lymphomas are indolent, often incurable and widely disseminated. In-
clude: follicular lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma/MALT, lymphocytic lympho-
ma (closely related to CLL and treated similarly), lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma 
(produces IgM = Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia, p370). See ﬁ g 8.63.

  • High-grade  lymphomas  are  more  aggressive,  but  often  curable.  There  is  often 
rapidly  enlarging  lymphadenopathy  with  systemic  symptoms.  Include:  Burkitt’s 
lymphoma (childhood disease with characteristic jaw lymphadenopathy; ﬁ gs 8.64, 
8.65), lymphoblastic lymphomas (like ALL), diff use large B-cell lymphoma.

Treatment  Huge  range  of  options,  depending  on  disease  subtype.  Low  grade: 
If symptomless, none may be needed. Radiotherapy may be curative in localized 
disease. Chlorambucil is used in diff use disease. Remission may be maintained by 
using interferon alfa or rituximab (see later in paragraph). Bendamustine is eff ec-
tive both with rituximab and as a monotherapy in rituximab-refractory patients. 
High  grade:  (eg  large  B-cell  lymphoma,  DLBCL),  ‘R-CHOP’  regimen:  Rituximab,  Cy-
clophosphamide,  Hydroxy daunorubicin,  vincristine  (Oncovin®)  and  Prednisolone. 
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (G-CSFs) help neutropenia—eg ﬁ lgrastim or 
lenograstim (at low doses it may be cost-eff ective).
Survival Histology is important. Prognosis is worse if, at presentation: • Age >60yrs. 
• Systemic  symptoms.  • Bulky  disease  (abdominal  mass >10cm).  • LDH.  • Dissem-
inated  disease.  Typical  5yr  survival  for  treated  patients:  ~30%  for  high-grade  and 
>50% for low-grade lymphomas, but the picture is very variable.

_OHCM_10e.indb   362

_OHCM_10e.indb   362

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Fig  8.62  Cutaneous  T-cell  lymphoma,  which 
has  caused  severe  ery throderma  (Sézary  syn-
drome) in a Caucasian woman.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig 8.63  (a) and (b): villous lymphocytes (splenic 
marginal zone lymphoma). (c): ‘buttock cells’ with 
cleaved nuclei (follicular lymphoma). (d): Sézary 
cells with convoluted nuclei.

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün & Dr Körogˇlu.

363

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.64  Burkitt’s lymphoma, with characteristic 
jaw lymphadenopathy.

Courtesy of Dr Tom D Thacher.

Fig 8.65  Burkitt’s lymphoma, with three baso-
philic vacuolated lymphoma cells.
From the New England Journal of Medicine, Bain, B,
 ‘Diagnosis from the blood smear’, 353(5), 498. 
Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts 
Medical Society.

The role of rituximab in untreated follicular lymphoma
Rituximab  kills  CD20 +ve  cells  by  antibody-directed  cytotoxicity  ±  apoptosis  in-
duction. It also sensitizes cells to CHOP. It is cost-eff ective when used with:
  • cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone (CVP)
  • cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP)
  • cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, prednisolone, and interferon alfa (CHVPi)
  • mitoxantrone, chlorambucil, and prednisolone (MCP)
  • chlorambucil.
It also has a role in maintaining remission, and in relapsed disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   363

_OHCM_10e.indb   363

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

364

Pancytopenia and bone marrow failure

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Bone marrow is responsible for haematopoiesis. In adults, this normally takes place 
in  the  central  skeleton  (vertebrae,  sternum,  ribs,  skull)  and  proximal  long  bones. 
In  some  anaemias  (eg  thalassaemia),  increased  demand  induces  haematopoiesis 
beyond the marrow (extramedullary haematopoiesis), in liver and spleen, causing 
organomegaly. All blood cells arise from an early pluripotent stem cell, which divides 
asymmetrically to produce another stem cell and a progenitor cell committed to a 
lineage (see ﬁ g 8.66). Committed progenitors further diff erentiate into myeloid or 
lymphocyte lineages, releasing their progeny into the blood.
Pancytopenia Reduction in all the major cell lines: red cells, white cells, and platelets. 
Causes are due to: 1 Marrow production: Aplastic anaemia (see BOX), inﬁ ltration (eg 
acute leukaemia, myelodysplasia, myeloma, lymphoma, solid tumours, TB), megalo-
blastic anaemia, myeloﬁ brosis (p366). 2 Peripheral destruction: Hypersplenism.
Agranulocytosis  Implies  that  granulocytes  (WBCs  with  neutrophil,  basophil,  or 
eosin ophil granules) have stopped being made, leaving the patient at risk of fatal 
infections. Many drugs can be the culprit: eg carbimazole, procainamide, sulfona-
mides,  gold,  clozapine,  dapsone.  When  starting  drugs  known  to  cause  agranu-
locytosis,  warn  patients  to  report  any  fever.  Neutropenia  (wcc  0.5≈109/L)  may 
declare itself initially as a sore throat. Stop the drug, commence neutropenic regi-
men and consider G-CSF if indicated (p352).
Marrow support Red cells survive for ~120d, platelets for ~8d, and neutrophils for 
1–2d, so early problems are mainly from neutropenia and thrombocytopenia.
1      Red cell transfusion: Transfusing 1U should raise Hb by ~10–15g/L (p348). Trans-
fusion may drop the platelet count (you may need to give platelets before or after).
2      Platelets:  Traumatic  bleeds,  purpura,  and  easy  bruising  occur  if  platelets 
<50≈109/L.  Spontaneous  bleeding  may  occur  if  platelets  <20≈109/L,  with  intrac-
ranial haem orrhage rarely. Platelets are stored at room temperature (22°C; not 
in the fridge). In marrow transplant or if severely immunosuppressed, platelets 
may need irradiation before use to prevent transfusion-associated GVHD. Platelets 
must be ABO compatible. They are not used in ITP (p345). Indications: • Platelets 
<10≈109/L. • Haemorrhage (eg DIC, p352). • Before invasive procedures (eg biopsy, 
lumbar puncture) to increase count to >50≈109/L. 4U of platelets should raise the 
count to >40≈109/L in adults; check dose needed with lab.

3      Neutrophils: Use neutropenic regimen if the count <0.5≈109/L (p352).
Bone marrow biopsy Gives diagnostic information where there are abnormalities 
in the peripheral blood; it is also an important staging test in the lymphoprolifera-
tive disorders. Ideally take an aspirate and trephine usually from the posterior iliac 
crest (aspirates can be taken from the anterior iliac crest or sternum). The aspirate 
provides a ﬁ lm which is examined by microscope. The trephine is a core of bone 
which allows assessment of bone marrow cellularity, architecture, and the presence 
of inﬁ ltrative disease (eg neoplasia). Coagulation disorders may need to be corrected 
pre-biopsy. Apply pressure afterwards (lie on that side for 1–2h if platelets are low).

Aplastic anaemia
This is a rare (~5 cases per million/year) stem cell disorder in which bone marrow 
stops making cells, leading to pancytopenia. Presents with features of anaemia 
(Hb), infection (WCC), or bleeding (platelets). Causes: Most cases are autoim-
mune, triggered by drugs, viruses (eg parvovirus, hepatitis), or irradiation. May 
also be inherited, eg Fanconi anaemia (p698). Tests: Bone marrow biopsy is diag-
nostic. Treatment: Mainly supportive in asymptomatic patients. Transfuse blood 
products as required and initiate neutropenic regimen if count <0.5≈109/L (p352). 
The treatment of choice in young patients with severe disease is allogeneic mar-
row transplantation from an HLA-matched sibling, which can be curative. Other-
wise,  immunosuppression  with  ciclosporin  and  antithymocyte  globulin  may  be 
eff ective, although it is not curative in most. There is no clear role for G-CSF.

_OHCM_10e.indb   364

_OHCM_10e.indb   364

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

365

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.66  Haematopoiesis and Sod’s law. When we contemplate a diagram like this (of seem-
ingly galactic complexity) we, being doctors, think ‘What can go wrong?’ With a sinking feeling 
we realize that every arc is an opportunity for multiple disasters. Perhaps, using the Hammer of 
Los (p322) and our own ingenuity we might occasionally complete these pathways without Sod 
intervening (Sod’s law states that if something can go wrong, it will—here Sod’s tubercular breath 
is seen blowing the red cell line off  course—TB is a famous cause of leukoerythroblastic anaemia). 
When we realize that every day each of us makes 175 billion red cells, 70 billion granulocytes, and 
175 billion platelets we sense that Sod is smiling to himself with especial relish. Anything can go 
wrong. Everything can go wrong. This latter we call aplastic anaemia. Agranulocytosis is when 
the Southerly arcs go wrong; thrombocytopenia when the West-pointing arcs go wrong. To the 
East we have the lymphocytes and their B- and T-cell complexities. Anaemia lies in the North of this 
diagram. And as for bleeding—how could our predecessors bear to waste a single drop of this stuff  
on purpose? Our minds are reeling at 175 billion red cells per day—but this is just when the system 
is idling. When we bleed, throughput can rise by an order of magnitude—if Sod is turning a blind 
eye are there suffi  cient haematinics (eg iron, B12 , and folate) to allow maximum haemopoiesis?

Figure ©Aria Rad.

_OHCM_10e.indb   365

_OHCM_10e.indb   365

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

366

The myeloproliferative disorders

Caused by clonal proliferation of haematopoietic myeloid stem cells in the bone mar-
row. These cells retain the ability to diff erentiate into RBCS, WBCS, or platelets, causing 
an excess of one or more of these cell types (table 8.10).
Table 8.10  Classiﬁ cation of myeloproliferative disorders
By proliferating cell type

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

RBC

WBC
Platelets
Fibroblasts

 Polycythaemia vera (PRV)
 Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML, p358)
 Essential thrombocythaemia
 Myeloﬁ brosis

Polycythaemia  Relative  polycythaemia  (plasma  volume,  normal  RBC  mass) 
may  be  acute  (due  to  dehydration)  or  chronic  (associated  with  obesity,  HTN,  and 
a high alcohol and tobacco intake). Absolute polycythaemia (RBC mass) is classi-
cally measured by dilution of infused autologous radioactive chromium (51Cr) lab-
elled RBCs. Causes are primary (polycythaemia vera) or secondary due to hypoxia 
(eg high altitudes, chronic lung disease, cyanotic congenital heart disease, heavy 
smoking)  or  inappropriately  erythropoietin  secretion  (eg  in  renal  carcinoma, 
hepatocellular carcinoma).
Polycythaemia  vera  The  malignant  proliferation  of  a  clone  derived  from  one 
pluripotent  stem  cell.  A  mutation  in  JAK2  (JAK2  V617F)  is  present  in  >95%.  The 
erythroid progenitor off spring are unusual in not needing erythropoietin to avoid 
apoptosis. There is excess proliferation of RBCs, WBCs, and platelets, leading to hy-
perviscosity and thrombosis. Commoner if >60yrs old.
Presentation: May be asymptomatic and detected on FBC, or present with vague 
symptoms  due  to  hyperviscosity  (p372):  headaches,  dizziness,  tinnitus,  visual  dis-
turbance. Itching after a hot bath, and erythromelalgia, a burning sensation in ﬁ n-
gers and toes, are characteristic. Signs: facial plethora and splenomegaly (in 60%). 
Gout may occur due to urate from RBC turnover. Features of arterial (cardiac, cer-
ebral, per ipheral) or venous (DVT, cerebral, hepatic) thrombosis may be present.
Investigations:  • FBC:  RCC,  Hb,  HCT,  PCV,  often  also  WBC  and  platelets.  • B12. 
• Marrow shows hypercellularity with erythroid hyperplasia. • Cytogenetics as re-
quired to diff erentiate from CML. • Serum erythropoietin. • Raised red cell mass on 
51Cr studies and splenomegaly, in the setting of a normal PaO2, is diagnostic.
Treatment: Aim to keep  HCT <0.45 to risk of thrombosis. In younger patients at 
low risk, this is done by venesection. If higher risk (age >60yrs, previous thrombo-
sis), hydroxycarbamide (=hydroxyurea) is used. -interferon is preferred in women 
of childbearing age. Aspirin 75mg daily is also given.
Prognosis: Variable, many remain well for years. Thrombosis and haemorrhage (due 
to defective platelets) are the main complications. Transition to myeloﬁ brosis occurs 
in ~30% or acute leukaemia in ~5%. Monitor FBC every 3 months.
Essential  thrombocythaemia  (ﬁ g  8.67)  A  clonal  proliferation  of  megakaryo-
cytes leads to persistently platelets, often >1000 ≈ 109/L, with abnormal function, 
causing  bleeding  or  arterial  and  venous  thrombosis,  and  microvascular  occlu-
sion—headache,  atypical  chest  pain,  light-headedness,  erythromelalgia.  Exclude 
other causes of thrombocytosis (see  BOX). Treatment: aspirin  75mg  OD. Hydroxy-
carbamide in high-risk patients.
Myeloﬁ brosis  There  is  hyperplasia  of  megakaryocytes  which  produce  platelet-
derived growth factor, leading to intense marrow ﬁ brosis and haematopoiesis in 
the spleen and livermassive hepatosplenomegaly. Presentation: Hypermetabolic 
symptoms: night sweats, fever, weight loss; abdominal discomfort due to spleno-
megaly; bone marrow failure (Hb, infections, bleeding). Film: Leuko erythroblastic 
cells (nucleated red cells, p328); characteristic teardrop RBCS (see ﬁ g 8.68). Hb. Bone 
marrow trephine for diagnosis (ﬁ g 8.69). Treatment: Marrow support (see p364). 
Allogeneic stem cell transplant may be curative in young people but carries a high 
risk of mortality. Prognosis: Median survival 4–5 years.

_OHCM_10e.indb   366

_OHCM_10e.indb   366

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Causes of thrombocytosis
Platelets >450 ≈ 109/L may be a reactive phenomenon, seen with many conditions 
including:
  • Bleeding
  • Infection
  • Chronic inﬂ ammation, eg collagen disorders.

  • Post-surgery
  • Iron deﬁ ciency

  • Malignancy
  • Trauma

367

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig  8.67  Essential  thrombocythaemia:  many 
platelets seen.

© Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Fig 8.68  Teardrop cells, in myeloﬁ brosis.

© Dr Nivaldo Medeiros.

Fig  8.69  Marrow  trephine  in  myelo ﬁ brosis: 
the  streaming  eff ect  is  caused  by  intense  ﬁ -
brosis.  Other  causes  of  marrow  ﬁ brosis:  any 
myeloprolif erative disorder, lymphoma, second-
ary carcinoma, TB, leukaemia, and irradiation.

© Prof. Christine Lawrence.

_OHCM_10e.indb   367

_OHCM_10e.indb   367

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

368

Myeloma: the chief plasma cell dyscrasia (PCD)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

PCDS are due to an abnormal proliferation of a single clone of plasma or lympho-
plasmacytic cells leading to secretion of immunoglobulin (Ig) or an Ig fragment, 
causing the dysfunction of many organs (esp kidney).The Ig is seen as a monoclonal 
band, or paraprotein, on serum or urine electrophoresis (see later in topic).
Classiﬁ cation Based on Ig product—IgG in ~ ⅔; IgA in ~ ⅓; a very few are IgM or IgD. 
Other Ig levels are low (‘immunoparesis’, causing susceptibility to infection). In ~ ⅔, 
urine contains Bence Jones proteins, which are free Ig light chains of kappa (κ) or 
lambda (λ) type, ﬁ ltered by the kidney.
Incidence 5/100 000. Peak age: 70yrs. :  ≈ 1:1. Afro-Caribbeans:Caucasians ≈ 2:1.
Clinical features • Osteolytic bone lesions cause backache, pathological fractures 
and vertebral collapse. Do serum electrophoresis on all >50 with new back pain.
  • Hypercalcaemia may be symptomatic (p676).  Lesions are due to osteoclast acti-

vation, from signalling by myeloma cells.

  • Anaemia, neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia may result from marrow inﬁ ltra-

tion by plasma cells, leading to symptoms of anaemia, infection, and bleeding.

  • Recurrent bacterial infections due to immunoparesis, and also because of neutro-

penia due to the disease and from chemotherapy.

  • Renal impairment due to light chain deposition (p314 & p370) is seen in up to 20% 
at diagnosis. The light chains have a toxic and inﬂ ammatory eff ect on the proximal 
tubule cells, but the damage is mainly caused by precipitation of light chains in the 
distal loop of Henle. Deposits may rarely be  AL-amyloid (causing nephrotic syn-
drome, see p370). Monoclonal immunoglobulins also disrupt glomeruli.

Tests Bloods: FBC: normocytic normochromic anaemia. Film: rouleaux (p328). Per-
sistently ESR (p372). Urea and creatinine, Ca2+ (in ~40%). Alk phos usually  unless 
healing fracture. Bone marrow biopsy: See ﬁ gs 8.70–8.73. Screening test: Serum 
and/or urine electrophoresis. 2-microglobulin (prognostic). Imaging:  X-rays: lytic 
‘punched-out’ lesions, eg pepper-pot skull, vertebral collapse, fractures, or osteopo-
rosis. CT or MRI may be useful to detect lesions not seen on XR. Diagnostic criteria: 
See BOX ‘Myeloma diagnosis’.
Treatment Supportive: • Analgesia for bone pain (avoid NSAIDS due to risk of renal 
impairment). Give all patients a bisphosphonate (clod ronate, zolendronate, or pa-
midronate), as they reduce fracture rates and bone pain. Local radiotherapy can help 
rapidly  in  focal  disease.  Orthopaedic  procedures  (vertebroplasty  or  kyphoplasty) 
may be helpful in vertebral collapse. • Anaemia should be corrected with transfu-
sion, and erythropoietin may be used. • Renal failure: rehydrate, and ensure adequate 
ﬂ uid intake of 3L/day to prevent further light chain-induced renal impairment. Di-
alysis may be needed in acute kidney injury. • Infections: Treat rapidly with broad-
spectrum  antibiotics  until  culture  results  are  known.  Regular  IV immunoglobulin 
infusions may be needed if recurrent.
Chemotherapy:  Induction  therapy  with,  eg  lenalidomide,  bortezomib,  and  dexa-
methasone. In suitably ﬁ t patients this may be followed by autologous stem-cell 
transplantation. In those unsuitable for transplantation, induction therapy is typi-
cally continued for 12–18 months, or until serum paraprotein levels have plateaued. 
Treatment  is  then  typically  held  until  (inevitably)  paraprotein  levels  start  to  rise 
again, at which point further chemotherapy or stem cell transplantation may be 
considered. NB: lenalidomide is a teratogenic immunomodulator which has multiple 
SE, notably neutropenia and thromboembolism: monitor for sepsis and consider as-
pirin or anticoagulation if risk , eg hyperviscosity or other comorbidities.
Prognosis  Worse  if:  >2  osteolytic  lesions,  2-microglobulin  >5.5mg/L,  Hb  <11g/L; 
albumin  <30g/L.  Risk  stratiﬁ cation  increasingly  based  upon  detection  of  speciﬁ c 
cytogenetic abnormalities associated with high risk of progression. Causes of death: 
infection, renal failure.

_OHCM_10e.indb   368

_OHCM_10e.indb   368

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Myeloma diagnosis

Have a high index of suspicion, eg in 
bone  pain  or  back  pain  which  is  not 
improving. Check blood ﬁ lm and elec-
trophoresis. Diagnostic criteria:
1      Monoclonal protein band in serum 

or urine electrophoresis.

2       Plasma cells on marrow biopsy.
3      Evidence  of  end-organ  damage 

from myeloma:

  • Hypercalcaemia.
  • Renal insuffi  ciency.
  • Anaemia.

4      Bone lesions: a skeletal survey after 
diagnosis  detects  bone  disease:  X-
rays of chest; all of spine; skull; pelvis 
± Tc-99m MIBI and PET (p739).

Causes of bone pain/tenderness
  • Trauma/fracture (steroids risk)
  • Myeloma  and  other  primary  malig-
nancy, eg plasmacytoma or sarcoma
  • Secondaries (eg from breast, lung etc)
  • Osteonecrosis, eg from microemboli 
  • Osteomyelitis/periostitis (eg syphilis)
  • Hydatid cyst (bone is a rare site)
  • Osteosclerosis, eg from hepatitis C
  • Paget’s disease of bone
  • Sickle cell anaemia
  • Renal osteodystrophy
  • CREST syndrome/Sjögren’s syndrome
  • Hyperparathyroidism.
Tests: PSA, ESR, Ca2+, LFT, electrophoresis.
Treatment: Treat the cause; bisphosph-
onates & NSAIDS may control symptoms.

369

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Complications of myeloma
  • Hypercalcaemia  (p676).  This  occurs  with  active  disease,  eg  at  presenta-
tion or  relapse. Rehydrate vigorously with IV saline 0.9% 4–6L/d (careful ﬂ uid 
 balance).  IV bisphosphonates, eg zolendronate or pamidronate, are useful for 
treating hypercalcaemia acutely.

  • Spinal cord compression (p466). Occurs in 5% of those with myeloma. Urgent 
MRI  if  suspected.  Treatment  is  with  dexamethasone  8–16mg/24h  PO  and  local 
radiotherapy.

  • Hyperviscosity  (p372)  causes  reduced  cognition,  disturbed  vision,  and  bleed-

ing. It is treated with plasmapheresis to remove light chains.

  • Acute renal injury is treated with rehydration. Urgent dialysis may be needed.

Fig 8.70  Myeloma bone marrow: many plasma 
cells with abnormal forms.

Fig  8.71  Marrow  section  in  myel oma,  stained 
with IGG kappa monoclonal antibody.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

(a)

(b)

Fig 8.72  An IGG kappa paraprotein monoclonal 
band  (immunoﬁ xation  electrophoresis;  a  con-
trol sample has run on the left).

Fig 8.73  Plasma cells in myeloma. (a) marrow 
smear, (b) peripheral smear. Note rouleaux for-
mation of red cells (p328 & p368).

Courtesy of Prof. Christine Lawrence.

Courtesy of Prof. Tangün & Dr Körogˇlu.

_OHCM_10e.indb   369

_OHCM_10e.indb   369

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

370

Paraproteinaemia

Paraproteinaemia denotes the presence in the circulation of immunoglobulins pro-
duced by a single clone of plasma cells. The para protein is recognized as a monoclo-
nal band (M band) on serum electrophoresis.9 There are six major categories:
1      Multiple myeloma See p368.
2      Waldenström’s  macroglobulinaemia  This  is  a  lymphoplasmacytoid  lympho-
ma producing a monoclonal  IgM paraprotein. Hyperviscosity is common (p372), 
with  CNS and  ocular  symptoms.  Lymphadenopathy  and  splenomegaly  are  also 
seen. ESR, with IgM paraprotein on serum electrophoresis. : None if asympto-
matic.  Chlorambucil,  ﬂ udarabine,  or  combination  chemotherapy  may  be  used. 
Plasmapheresis9 for hyperviscosity (p372).
3      Primary amyloidosis See following topic.
4      Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain signiﬁ cance (MGUS) is common (3% 
>70yrs). There is a paraprotein in the serum but no myeloma, 1° amyloid, macro-
globulinaemia, or lymphoma, with no bone lesions, no Bence Jones protein, and 
a low concentration of paraprotein, with <10% plasma cells in the marrow. Some 
develop myeloma or lymphoma. Refer to a haematologist (?for marrow biopsy). 

5      Paraproteinaemia in lymphoma or leukaemia Eg seen in 5% of CLL.
6      Heavy chain disease Neoplastic cells produce free Ig heavy chains.  chain dis-
ease is most important, causing malabsorption from inﬁ ltration of bowel wall (im-
munoproliferative small intestine disease—IPSID). It may progress to lymphoma.

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Amyloidosis

This is a group of disorders characterized by extracellular deposits of a protein in 
abnormal  ﬁ brillar  form,  resistant  to  degradation.  The  following  are  the  systemic 
forms of amyloidosis. Amyloid deposition is also a feature of Alzheimer’s disease, 
type 2 diabetes mellitus, and haemodialysis-related amyloidosis.
AL amyloid (primary amyloidosis) Proliferation of plasma cell clone  Amyloi-
dogenic monoclonal immunoglobulins  Fibrillar light chain protein deposition  
Organ  failure    Death.  Associations:  myeloma  (15%);  Waldenström’s,  lymphoma. 
Organs involved:
  • Kidneys: glomerular lesions—proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome.
  • Heart: restrictive cardiomyopathy (looks ‘sparkling’ on echo), arrhythmias, angina.
  • Nerves: peripheral and autonomic neuropathy; carpal tunnel syndrome.
  • Gut:  macroglossia  (big  tongue),  malabsorption/weight,  perforation,  haemor-

rhage, obstruction, and hepatomegaly.

  • Vascular: purpura, especially periorbital—a characteristic feature (ﬁ g 8.74).
: optimize nutrition;  PO melphalan + prednisolone extends survival. High-dose  IV 
melphalan with autologous stem cell transplantation may be better.
AA amyloid (secondary amyloidosis) Here amyloid is derived from serum amyloid 
A, an acute phase protein, reﬂ ecting chronic inﬂ ammation in rheumatoid arthritis, 
UC/Crohn’s, familial Mediterranean fever, and chronic infections—TB, bronchiectasis, 
osteomyelitis. It aff ects kidneys, liver, and spleen (ﬁ g 8.75), and may present with 
proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, or hepatosplenomegaly. Macroglossia is not seen; 
cardiac involvement is rare (ventricular hypertrophy and murmurs). : manage the 
underlying condition optimally.
Familial  amyloidosis (Autosomal dominant, eg from mutations in transthyretin, 
a transport protein produced by the liver.) Usually causes a sensory or autonomic 
neuropathy ± renal or cardiac involvement. Liver transplant can cure.
Diagnosis: Made with biopsy of aff ected tissue, and positive Congo Red staining 
with  apple-green  birefringence  under  polarized  light  microscopy.  The  rectum  or 
subcutaneous fat are relatively non-invasive sites for biopsy and are +ve in 80%.
Prognosis:  Median  survival  is  1–2  years.  Patients  with  myeloma  and  amyloidosis 
have a shorter survival than those with myeloma alone. 

9  Electrophoresis and plasmapheresis look as though they should share endings, but they do not: Greek 
phoros = bearing (esis = process), but aphairesis is Greek for removal.

_OHCM_10e.indb   370

_OHCM_10e.indb   370

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Fig 8.74  Periorbital purpura in amyloidosis.  

©Prof. Christine Lawrence.

371

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Fig 8.75  Areas of amyloid de position 
in  liver  and  spleen  in  amyloidosis
(isotope scan).

Reproduced from Warrell et al.,
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 2010,
with permission from
Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   371

_OHCM_10e.indb   371

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

372

Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

The ESR is a sensitive but non-speciﬁ c indicator of the presence of disease. It meas-
ures how far  RBCS fall through a column of anticoagulated blood in 1h. If certain 
proteins cover red cells, these cause RBCS to stick to each other in columns (the same 
phenomenon as rouleaux, p328) so they fall faster.
Causes of a raised ESR Any inﬂ ammation (eg infection, rheumatoid arthritis, ma-
lignancy, myocardial infarction), anaemia, and macrocytosis.
Caveats  •ESR    with  age.  The  Westergren  method  is  a  rough  guide  to  calculate 
the  upper  limit  of  normal  in  older  patients: 
: ESR=age  ÷  2; : ESR=(age + 10) ÷ 2.
•Some  conditions  lower  the  ESR,  eg  poly-
cythaemia  (due  to  red  cell  concentration), 
microcytosis,  and  sickle-cell  anaemia.  Even 
a slightly raised ESR in these patients should 
prompt  one  to  ask:  ‘What  else  is  the  mat-
ter?’
Management •In those with a slightly raised ESR, the best plan is probably to wait 
a  month  and  repeat  the  test.  •If  the  ESR  is  markedly  raised (>100mm/h),  this  can 
have a 90% predictive value for disease, so such patients should be thoroughly in-
vestigated,  even  in  the  presence  of  non-speciﬁ c  symptoms.  Take  a  full  history,  ex-
amine carefully and consider these tests: FBC, plasma electrophoresis, U&E, PSA, chest 
and abdominal imaging, ± biopsy of bone marrow or temporal artery.

Fig 8.76  Hyperviscosity syndrome.

Plasma viscosity (PV)

Normal range: 1.50–1.72mPa/s. In many labs, this has replaced the ESR, as it is less 
aff ected by anaemia and simpler to automate. PV is aff ected by the concentration 
of large plasma proteins and  in the same conditions as the ESR—both PV and ESR 
 in chronic inﬂ ammation and are less aff ected by acute changes (unlike CRP, p686).

Hyperviscosity syndrome

Symptoms Lethargy; confusion; cognition; CNS disturbance; chest pain; abdom inal 
pain (and sometimes spontaneous GI or GU bleeding); faints; visual disturbance (eg 
vision,  amaurosis  fugax,  retinopathy—eg  engorged  retinal  veins,  haemorrhages, 
exudates; and a blurred disc as seen in ﬁ g 8.76). The visual symptoms are like ‘looking 
through a watery car windscreen’.
Causes  of  high  blood  viscosity  Very  high  red  cell  count  (haematocrit  >50,  eg 
polycythaemia vera), white cell count (>100≈109/L, eg leukaemia), or plasma compo-
nents—usually immunoglobulins, in myeloma or Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia 
(p370, as IgM is larger and so  viscosity more than the same amount of IgG). Drugs: oral 
contraceptives, diuretics, IV IG, erythropoietin, chemotherapy, radio-contrast media.
Treatment  Urgent  treatment  is  needed  which  depends  on  the  cause.  Venesec-
tion is done in polycythaemia. Leukapheresis in leukaemias to remove white cells. 
Plasmapheresis in myeloma and Waldenström’s: blood is withdrawn via a plasma 
exchange  machine,  the  supernatant  plasma  from  this  is  discarded,  and  the  RBCS 
returned to the patient after being resuspended in a suitable medium.

_OHCM_10e.indb   372

_OHCM_10e.indb   372

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

373

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

visceral 

‘tropical 

(enlarged 

leishmaniasis, 

splenomegaly’ 

(See  also  p604.)  Massive 

The spleen and splenectomy
The spleen plays a vital immunological role by acting as a reservoir for lympho-
cytes, and in dealing with bacteraemias.
splenomegaly: 
Causes  of 
to 
(hyperreactive  malarial  spleno-
the  RIF):  CML,  myeloﬁ brosis,  malaria 
(idiopathic—
megaly), 
Africa,  south-east  Asia),  and  Gaucher’s  syndrome.  Moderate:  • Infection  (eg 
EBV, endocarditis, TB, malaria, leishmaniasis, schistosomiasis). • Portal hyperten-
sion (liver cirrhosis). • Haematological (haemolytic anaemia, leukaemia especial-
ly  CML,  lymphoma).  • Connective  tissue  disease  (RA,  SLE).  • Others:  sarcoidosis, 
primary antibody deﬁ ciency (OHCS p198), idiopathic.
When  is  a  mass  in  the  left  upper  quadrant  a  spleen:  (Main  diff erential:  en-
larged  left  kidney.)  The  spleen:  • Is  dull  to  percussion.  • Enlarges  towards  the 
RIF. • Moves down on inspiration. • You may feel a medial notch. • ‘You can’t get 
above it’ (ie the top margin disappears under the ribs).
Tests:  Image  the  spleen  with  abdominal  USS  or  CT.  Hunt  for  the  cause  of  en-
largement: look for lymphadenopathy and liver disease, eg: FBC, ESR, LFT ± liver, 
marrow, or lymph node biopsy.
Complications: Symptoms of anaemia, infection, or bleeding can occur as a re-
sult  of  hypersplenism:  cells  become  trapped  in  the  spleen’s  reticuloendothelial 
system causing pancytopenia. Splenectomy may be required if severe.
Splenectomy:  Main  indications:  splenic  trauma,  hypersplenism,  autoimmune 
haemolysis:  in  ITP  (p345),  warm  autoimmune  haemolytic  anaemia  (p338),  or 
congenital  haemolytic  anaemias.  Mobilize  early  post-splenectomy  as  transient 
platelets predisposes to thrombi. A characteristic blood ﬁ lm is seen following 
splenectomy,  with  Howell–Jolly  bodies,  Pappenheimer  bodies,  and  target  cells 
(see p328).
The  main  problem  post-splenectomy  is  lifelong  increased  risk  from  infec-
tion.  The  spleen  contains  macrophages  which  ﬁ lter  and  phagocytose  bacteria. 
Post-splenectomy  infection  is  caused  most  commonly  by  encapsulated  organ-
isms: Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae, and Neisseria men-
ingitidis. Reduce this risk by giving: 
1      Immunizations:

  • Pneumococcal  vaccine  (p167),  at  least  2  weeks  pre-op  to  ensure  good  re-
sponse, or as soon as possible after emergency splenectomy, eg after trau-
ma. Re-immunize every 5–10yrs. Avoid in pregnancy.
  • Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae type b vaccine (Hib, see p391).
  • Meningococcal vaccination course, including Men B, Men C, and Men ACWY.
  • Annual inﬂ uenza vaccine (p396).

2      Life-long  prophylactic  oral  antibiotics:  phenoxymethylpenicillin  (penicillin  V) 

or erythromycin if penicillin allergic.

3      Pendants, bracelets, or patient-held cards to alert medical staff .
4      Advice to seek urgent medical attention if any signs of infection: will require 

admission for broad-spectrum antibiotics if infection develops.

5      If  travelling  abroad,  warn  of  risk  of  severe  malaria  and  advise  meticulous 

prophylaxis, with nets, repellent, and medication.

The advice given here also applies to hyposplenic patients, eg in sickle-cell anae-
mia or coeliac disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   373

_OHCM_10e.indb   373

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

374

Thrombophilia  

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

Thrombophilia is an inherited or acquired coagulopathy that predisposes to throm-
bosis, usually venous: DVT or PE (venous thromboembolism: VTE). Special precautions 
are needed when there is an additional risk factor for thrombosis, eg surgery, preg-
nancy, or enforced rest (see BOX for other risk factors). Only ~50% of patients with 
thrombosis and a +ve family history have an identiﬁ able thrombophilia on routine 
tests: others may have abnormalities that are as yet unidentiﬁ ed.
Inherited • Activated protein c (APC) resistance/factor V Leiden: Chief cause of in-
herited thrombophilia. Present in ~5% of the population, although most will not de-
velop thrombosis. Usually associated with a single point mutation in factor V (factor 
V Leiden), so that this clotting factor is not broken down by APC. Risk of DVT or PE is 
raised 5-fold if heterozygous for the mutation (50-fold if homozygous). Thrombotic 
risk is increased in pregnancy and those on oestrogens (OHCS p33, p257 & p303).
• Prothrombin  gene  mutation:  Causes  high  prothrombin  levels  and  thrombosis 
due to down-regulation of ﬁ brinolysis, by thrombin-activated ﬁ brinolysis inhibitor.
• Protein  C  &  S  deﬁ ciency:  These  vitamin  K-dependent  factors  act  together  to 
cleave and so neutralize factors V & VIII. Heterozygotes deﬁ cient for either protein 
risk thrombosis. Skin necrosis also occurs (esp. if on warfarin). Homozygous deﬁ -
ciency for either protein causes neonatal purpura fulminans—fatal, if untreated.
• Antithrombin  deﬁ ciency:  Antithrombin  is  a  co-factor  of  heparin,  and  inhibits 
thrombin.  Less  common,  aff ects  1:500.  Heterozygotes’  thrombotic  risk  is  greater 
than protein C or S deﬁ ciency by ~4-fold. Homozygosity is incompatible with life.
Acquired  Causes:  • Antiphospholipid  syndrome  (APL:  p554)—serum  antiphospho-
lipid  antibodies  (lupus  anticoagulant  ±  anticardiolipin  antibody)  predispose  to  ve-
nous and arterial thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, and recurrent fetal loss. In most it 
is a primary disease, but it is also seen in SLE. • Oral contraceptive pills/HRT (relative 
risk 2–4; related to both oestrogen and progesterone content/type). • Any cause of 
thrombocytosis or polycythaemia may also cause thrombosis (p366).
Which tests? Ask the lab. Do FBC, ﬁ lm, clotting (PT, thrombin time, APTT, ﬁ brinogen) 
± APC resistance test, lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies, and assays 
for antithrombin and proteins C & S deﬁ ciency (± DNA analysis by PCR for the factor V 
Leiden mutation if  APC resistance test is +ve, and for prothrombin gene mutation). 
These tests should ideally be done when the patient is well, not pregnant, and off  
anticoagulation for 1 month.
Who?  Test  those  with:  • arterial  thrombosis  or  MI  at  <50yrs  old  (eg  for  APL)
• unprovoked VTE (ie at <40yrs with no risk factors) • VTE with oral contraceptives/
pregnancy • unexplained recurrent VTE • unusual site, eg mesenteric or portal vein 
thrombosis • recurrent fetal loss (≥3) • neonatal thrombosis.
Who not? Those already on lifelong anticoagulation, 1st-degree relatives of peo-
ple  with  a  history  of  DVT/PE  or  thrombophilia  except  in  special  circumstances. 
There is often no beneﬁ t to testing (ie no change to management), it is expensive 
and may cause signiﬁ cant worry to patients: be sparing in requesting these tests.
Treatment Anticoagulate acute thrombosis (p350). If recurrence occurs with no 
other  risk  factors,  consider  lifelong  anticoagulation.  Recurrence  whilst  on  treat-
ment should be treated by increasing treatment intensity (eg target INR to 3–4). 
In antithrombin deﬁ ciency, high doses of heparin may be needed; liaise with a hae-
matologist. In protein C or S deﬁ ciency, monitor treatment closely as skin necrosis 
may occur with warfarin.
Prevention  Lifelong  anticoagulation  is  not  needed  in  absence  of  VTE,  but  advise 
of risk with the oral contraceptive pill or HRT, and counsel as regards to the best 
form of contraception. Warn about other risk factors for VTE. Prophylaxis may be 
needed  in  pregnancy,  eg  in  antiphospholipid  syndrome  (get  expert  help:  aspirin 
and, sometimes, prophylactic heparin are used as warfarin is teratogenic, see OHCS 
p33). Prophylactic SC heparin may also be indicated in high-risk situations, eg pre-
surgery.

_OHCM_10e.indb   374

_OHCM_10e.indb   374

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Other risk factors for thrombosis
Arterial:
 • Smoking
 • Hypertension
 • Hyperlipidaemia
 • Diabetes mellitus.

Venous:
 • Surgery
 • Trauma
 • Immobility
 • Pregnancy, oral contraceptive pill, HRT
 • Age
 • Obesity
 • Varicose veins
 • Other conditions: heart failure, malignancy, inﬂ amma tory 

bowel disease, nephrotic syndrome, 
paroxys  mal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (p338).

For thrombophilia in pregnancy, see OHCS p32; for anticoagulant use in pregnancy 
and thromboprophylaxis, see OHCS p33.

375

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

_OHCM_10e.indb   375

_OHCM_10e.indb   375

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

376

Immunosuppressive drugs

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

As well as being used in leukaemias and cancers, immunosuppression is required in 
organ and marrow transplants, and plays a role in the treatment of many diseases: 
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, autoimmune hepatitis, asthma, SLE, vasculitis, and 
IBD, to name a few.
Prednisolone Steroids can be life-saving, but bear in mind:
  • Long-term  steroids  (>3  weeks,  or  repeated  courses)  must  not  be  stopped  sud-
dently.  Risk of Addisonian crisis due to adrenal insuffi  ciency, see p836. Plan a 
gradual taper over weeks (with the advice of an endocrinologist if needed).

  • Certain conditions may be made worse by steroids, eg TB, hypertension, chicken-

pox, osteoporosis, diabetes: here careful monitoring is needed.

  • Growth retardation may occur in young patients, and the elderly frequently get 

more SE from treatment.

  • Interactions:  effi  cacy  is  reduced  by  anti-epileptics  (see  later  in  topic)  and  ri-

fampicin.

  • Caution  in  pregnancy  (may  cause  fetal  growth  retardation).  See  BNF  for  use  in 

breastfeeding.

Side  effects:  Multiple  and  serious  (see  table  8.11):  minimize  these  by  using  the 
lowest  dose  possible  for  the  shortest  period  of  time.  Prescribe  calcium  and  vi-
tamin  D  supplements  to  reduce  risk  of  osteoporosis  (p682)  or  consider  bisphos-
phonates. Before starting long-term treatment, explain clearly the potential SE to 
patients and ensure they are aware of the following:
  • Do not stop steroids suddenly (p836).
  • Consult a doctor if unwell;  steroid dose (eg if requiring antibiotics or surgery).
  • Carry a steroid card stating dose taken, and the indication.
  • Avoid over-the-counter drugs, eg NSAIDS: aspirin and ibuprofen (risk of DU).
  • Exercise and smoking cessation help to prevent osteoporosis.
Azathioprine  SE:  Diarrhoea,  abdominal  pain,  marrow  suppression  (anaemia,  lym-
phopenia),  nephritis,  pancreatitis,  transaminitis.  Interactions:  Mercaptopurine  and 
azathioprine (which is metabolized to mercaptopurine) are metabolized by xanthine 
oxidase  (XO).  So  toxicity  results  if  full  dose  azathioprine  co-administered  with  XO 
inhibitors (eg allopurinol). Monitoring: Local guidelines should be in place to guide; 
typically weekly FBC, U&E, creatine, LFT during initation then 1–3-monthly once stable.
Ciclosporin,  tacrolimus  Calcineurin  inhibitors  with  important  roles  in  reducing 
rejection in organ and marrow transplant. The main SE is dose-related nephrotox-
icity: check blood levels.
  • Other SE: gum hyperplasia (ciclosporin), tremor, BP (stop if ), oedema, paraesthe-
siae, confusion, seizures, hepatotoxicity, lymphoma, skin cancer—avoid sunbathing.
  • Monitor U&E and creatinine every 2 weeks for the ﬁ rst 3 months, then monthly if 
dose >2.5mg/kg/d (every 2 months if less than this). Reduce the dose if creati-
nine rises by >30% on two measurements even if the creatinine is still in normal 
range. Stop if the abnormality persists. Also monitor LFT.

  • Interactions  are  legion:  potentiated  by:  ketoconazole,  diltiazem,  verapamil, 
the  Pill,  erythromycin,  grapefruit  juice.  Effi  cacy  is  reduced  by:  barbiturates, 
carbamaz epine,  phenytoin,  rifampicin.  Avoid  concurrent  nephrotoxics:  eg  gen-
tamicin. Concurrent NSAIDs augment hepatotoxicity—monitor LFT.

Methotrexate  An  antimetabolite.  Inhibits  dihydrofolate  reductase,  which  is  in-
volved in the synthesis of purines and pyrimidines. See p547.
Cyclophosphamide  An  alkylating  agent.  SE:  marrow  suppression  (monitor  FBC), 
nausea,  infertility,  teratogenic,  haemorrhagic  cystitis  due  to  an  irritative  urinary 
metabolite. There is a slight risk of later developing bladder cancer or leukaemia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   376

_OHCM_10e.indb   376

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

Table 8.11  Side-eff ects of steroid use
System
Gastrointestinal

Adverse reactions
Pancreatitis
Candidiasis
Oesophageal ulceration
Peptic ulceration

Musculoskeletal Myopathy

Endocrine

CNS

Eye

Osteoporosis
Fractures
Growth suppression
Adrenal suppression
Cushing’s syndrome
Aggravated epilepsy
Depression; psychosis
Cataracts; glaucoma
Papilloedema
Increased susceptibility to and severity of infections, eg chickenpox

Immune
Steroids can also cause fever and WCC; steroids only rarely cause leucopenia.

377

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
a
H

_OHCM_10e.indb   377

_OHCM_10e.indb   377

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

9  Infectious diseases

Contents
What is life?  379
Infectious disease: an overview  380

Bacterial infection:
Bacterial infection: an overview  382
Antibiotics  384
Antibiotics: summary tables  386
Gram-positive bacteria  388
Gram-negative bacteria  390
Tuberculosis (TB): presentation  392
Tuberculosis (TB): diagnosis and 

treatment  394

Viral infection:
Inﬂ uenza  396
Human immunodeﬁ ciency virus

(HIV): diagnosis  398

Complications of HIV infection  400
HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART)  402
Herpes viruses  404
Other viruses  406

Other:
Immunization  407
Fungi  408
Healthcare-associated (nosocomial)

infection  410

Sexually transmitted infection  412
Imported and unusual infection:
Fever in the returning traveller  414
Enteric fever  415
Malaria: diagnosis  416
Malaria: treatment  418
Mosquito-borne disease  420
Vector-borne disease  422
Zoonoses  424
Viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF)  426
Gastroenteritis: an overview  428
Gastroenteritis: speciﬁ c infections  430
Gastrointestinal parasites  432
Schistosomiasis and liver disease  434
Neurological disease  436
Eye disease  438
Skin disease  440
Pyrexia of unknown origin  442
Eliciting the weird and the wonderful 

443

Fig 9.1  Leeuwenhoek’s microscope. Antoni van 
Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) was an unlikely scholar: 
a draper with no academic education. He mixed 
uncomfortably in a scientiﬁ c world made up of 
those better educated, wealthier, and with more 
reﬁ ned manners. He felt unworthy of publication 
but submitted hundreds of letters to the Royal 
Society, always asking his readers to account for 
his humble origins. Despite his self-deprecation, 
his  microscopy  was  sophisticated.  His  surviv-
ing  lens  magniﬁ ed  ≈266  and  resolved  down  to 
1.35μm,  comparable  to  that  of  a  modern  com-
pound microscope. With it he gained one of the 
ﬁ rst  insights  into  the  ‘invisible’  living  creatures 
of the microscopic world. His microscopes were 
cheap and easy to produce—he made 500 for his 
personal use. He plated them in gold and silver to 
add a prestige that the scientiﬁ c world felt they 
lacked. But that world failed to see beyond the 
end of its turned up nose. Bloodletting, purging, 
and emetics would continue to fail patients for a 
further 150 years.

We thank Dr Chris Conlon, our Specialist Reader for this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   378

_OHCM_10e.indb   378

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

What is life?
By convention, life is anything which is organic and converts nutrients into prog-
eny. Failure to meet this deﬁ nition means non-living, dead, dying, or perhaps male. 
Life is a thing of dynamism, fragility, beauty, danger, and evanescence; gushing 
forth from a single source. But here the certainties end: what does it really take 
to be alive? Are viruses and prions living? How many branches are there on our 
tree? The harder we look, the more complexities we ﬁ nd. The Hillis plot is a circular 
phylogenetic tree, and a representation of humanity’s place in nature. We are duly 
humbled by this challenge to our imagined self-importance, reminding us that we 
do not in reality occupy a privileged position in the hierarchy of the living, just a 
unique subunit RNA sequence (ﬁ g 9.2).

379

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.2  Tree of life based on subunit RNA sequences sampled from ~3000 species out of the 1.7 
million species that are formally named. The image on the right is a close up of the ‘animal’ seg-
ment of the diagram (upper left quadrant) showing ‘You are here’.

Copyright David M. Hillis, Derrick Zwickl and Robin Gutell, University of Texas.

http://www.zo.utexas.edu/faculty/antisense/downloadﬁ lesToL.html

Because micro-organisms kill our friends we think of them as bad:

‘I have no philosophy, nor piety, no art of reﬂ ection, no theory of compensa-
tion to meet things so hid eous, so cruel, and so mad, they are just unspeak-
ably horrible and irremediable to me and I stare at them with angry and 
almost blighted eyes.’

Henry James, 1915, describing the death of Rupert Brooke from septicaemia.
But this is a mistake. Kill off  micro-organisms and the whole show ﬁ zzles out. 
Micro-organisms gave us the DNA and organelles needed for reading and digesting 
this page. Even killing a single pathogen might be a mistake: Sod’s Law will prob-
ably ensure that something worse will come to inhabit the vacated ecospace. Prod 
one part of the system and events ripple out in an unending stream of unintended 
consequences,  played  out  under  the  stars,  which  themselves  are  evolving,  and 
which donate and receive our primordial elements.
Can we win against infectious diseases? No. But winning or losing is the wrong 
image: infectious diseases have made us who we are. All we can do is live with 
them.  To  help  us  do  this  in  ways  that  are  not  too  destructive  we  need  robust 
public health surveillance, sound vector-control policies, political will, quarantine 
laws,  openness,  and  cooperation.  Most  importantly,  do  not  underestimate  the 
importance  of  maintaining  our  infectious  cohabitants  in  their  apparent  subor-
dinate position. The speed and capacity for learning by ribonucleic malware and 
single-celled organisms is amazing. So do not inadvertently teach them. Preserve 
your  precious  warfare  tactics.  Expose  them  to  antibiotic  therapies  only  in  a 
stand-off  situation from which they cannot return to ﬁ ght again.

_OHCM_10e.indb   379

_OHCM_10e.indb   379

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
380

Infectious disease: an overview

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

• Zika

Viruses
RNA viruses
Picornavirus (‘tiny RNA’):
  • Rhinovirus
  • Poliovirus
Calicivirus (‘cup’), eg norwalk
Flavivirus (‘yellow’):
  • Dengue 
  • Yellow fever
Coronavirus (‘crown’): URTI
Rhabdovirus (‘rod’), eg rabies
Filovirus (‘thread’), eg Ebola/Marburg
Paramyxovirus (‘near mucus’), eg mumps

It is not possible for any ID chapter to be constructed so that it has the right balance 
throughout the world. Many of our readers come from communities where malaria is 
the primary diff erential, and AIDS-related deaths are common. In contrast, it is chest, 
GU, and ENT infections which predominate in the UK; and AIDS is considered only where 
there is failure of either the diagnosis or treatment of HIV, which are universally available 
and free at the point of care. Many of the diseases in this chapter cause multisystem 
pathology. For these infections, it may be helpful to classify by pathogen (table 9.1). 
However, infectious agents do not walk in the door and introduce themselves. Detective 
work may be necessary based on geography; or exposure: to vectors, animals, and con-
taminated water/food. And so other pages in this chapter have that as their (helpful) 
premise. When infection is organ speciﬁ c, you may need to look elsewhere (table 9.2).
Table 9.1  Infectious disease by pathogen (illustrative, not exhaustive)
Bacteria
Gram positive
Staphylococci:
  • Staph. aureus (coagulase +ve)
  • Staph. epidermidis (coagulase Ωve)
Streptococci:
  • -haemolytic, eg Strep. pneumoniae
  • -haemolytic, eg Strep. pyogenes
Enterococci
Clostridium species:
  • C. botulinum (botulism)
  • C. perfringens(gas gangrene)
  • C. tetani (tetanus)
  • C. difﬁ cile (diarrhoea)
Gram negative
Neisseria:
  • N. meningitidis (meningitis)
  • N. gonorrheae (gonorrhea)
Helicobacter pylori
Escherichia coli
Shigella specie s
Salmonella species
Campylobacter jejuni
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae
Bordetella pertussis (whooping cough)
Vibrio cholerae (cholera)
Yersinia pestis (plague)
Mycobacteria
M. tuberculosis
M. leprae
Intracellular bacteria
Chlamydia
Rickettsia (rickettsial disease)
Coxiella burnetii
Spirochaetes
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Treponema (syphilis, yaws)
Leptospira (Weil’s disease)

Fungi
Candida
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Cryptococcus
Parasites
Protozoa
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium species
Toxoplasma gondii
Plasmodium species (malaria)
Leishmania species (leishmaniasis)
Trypanosoma species (trypanosomiasis) 
Nematodes
Soil-transmitted helminths
Filarial disease
Trematodes
Schistosoma (schistosomiasis), ﬂ ukes
Cestodes
Hydatid disease, tapeworm

DNA viruses
Hepadnavirus (‘liver DNA’): hepatitis
Parvovirus (‘small’): gastroenteritis
Herpesvirus (‘creeping’):
  • HSV
  • VZV
  • CMV
  • EBV

_OHCM_10e.indb   380

_OHCM_10e.indb   380

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Table 9.2  Infectious disease by organ system
System
Respiratory

Infection
Pneumonia
Empyema—infected pleural eff usion
Fungal infections of the lung
Peptic ulcer disease
Gastroenteritis
Colitis, proctitis, diverticulitis, appendicitis
Viral hepatitis
Tropical liver disease
Cholecystitis, cholangitis, gallbladder empyema
Peritonitis
Lower urinary tract infection, cystitis, pyelonephritis
Cervicitis, vulvovaginitis
Genital ulceration
Genital warts
Pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease, endometritis
Infective endocarditis
Myocarditis
Pericarditis
Meningitis, encephalitis, subdural empyema
Infective neuropathy
Skin ulcers, gangrene
Tropical skin disease
Surgical wound infection

GI

GU and
gynaecology

Cardiovascular

Nervous 
system

Skin and soft 
tissue

Bone and joint Osteomyelitis

ENT
Eye

Septic arthritis
Pharyngitis, laryngitis, otitis media
Tropical eye disease

381

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Page
pp166–70
p170
p177
p252
pp428–33

p278
pp434–5
p634
p606
pp296–7
pp412–3
pp412–3
p406
OHCS p286
pp150–1
pp152–4
p154
pp822–4
pp504–5
pp660–1
pp422–3
p571, p576
OHCS p696
p544
OHCS p564
pp438–9

The management of infectious disease includes prevention whenever possible. Tracing 
the source of disease and contacts are essential in the management of outbreaks.  
Notiﬁ cation  to  your  local  health  protection  team  (see  https://www.gov.uk/guidance/
notiﬁ able-diseases-and-causative-organisms-how-to-report) is a statutory duty for the following 
conditions (only clinical suspicion is required, accuracy of diagnosis is secondary):
  • Acute encephalitis
  • Acute infectious hepatitis
  • Acute meningitis
  • Acute poliomyelitis
  • Anthrax
  • Botulism
  • Brucellosis
  • Cholera
  • Diphtheria
  • Enteric fever
  • Food poisoning

  • Rubella
  • SARS
  • Scarlet fever
  • Small pox
  • Tetanus
  • Tuberculosis
  • Typhus
  • Viral haemorrhagic fever
  • Whooping cough
  • Yellow fever.

  • HUS
  • Infectious dysentery
  • Invasive group A strep
  • Legionnaire’s disease
  • Leprosy
  • Malaria
  • Measles
  • Meningococcal sepsis
  • Mumps
  • Plague
  • Rabies

Infectious disease resources
The Hillis plot (ﬁ g 9.2, p379) tells us that ID chapters will always fail to be exhaustive. 
We therefore direct you to the following excellent resources:
  • Public Health England, https://www.gov.uk/topic/health-protection/infectious-diseases
  • World Health Organization (WHO), http://www.who.int/topics/en/
  • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, http://www.cdc.gov

_OHCM_10e.indb   381

_OHCM_10e.indb   381

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
382

Bacterial infection: an overview

Humans  and  bacteria  are  symbiotes,  with  each  of  us  host  to  ten  times  as  many 
bacterial cells as our own human cells. Our gut, skin, and mucosal linings are covered 
with bacteria. We rely on this for nutrition, functioning vitamin K, anti-inﬂ ammatory 
eff ects, and immune system regulation.

Bacterial  disease  results  from  a  breach  of  the  measures  that  limit  bacteria  to 
their ‘normal’ roles: skin commensals moved into the bloodstream by a cannula, an-
tibiotics altering the commensal microﬂ ora, immune system evasion or dysfunction 
allowing organisms to stray beyond their usual boundaries, toxin production. When 
treating infections we should therefore remember to look beyond the off ending or-
ganism and consider what factors may have aided pathogenesis: malnutrition, ‘bar-
rier’ breach by cancer/plastic, immunosuppression.
See ‘Sepsis’, p792.

Bacterial glossary
Bacteria: Prokaryotic micro-organism without a membrane-bound nucleus.
Classiﬁ cation  of  bacteria:  By  microscopy  and  culture  of  infected  samples.
Informs antibiotic choice. Includes:
  • Gram stain: a staining technique. Bacteria with 
thick,  exposed  peptidoglycan  layers  will  stain 
‘Gram  positive’  (purple/blue).  Bacteria  with  a 
protected peptidoglycan layer will counterstain 
pink/red and are ‘Gram negative’ (ﬁ g 9.3).

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

  • Shape:  cocci  =  round;  bacilli  =  rod-shaped; 

spiro chaete = spiral.

  • Aerobes/anaerobes: some bacteria cannot sur-
vive without oxygen (obligate aerobes), whilst 
others cannot grow in its presence (obligate an-
aerobes). Many more can survive in either en-
vironment (facultative anaerobes). Some types 
of infection are more likely to involve aerobic 
or anaerobic bacteria, eg GI infections are typi-
cally anaerobic.

Fig  9.3  (a)  Gram-positive  versus 
(b) Gram-negative cell membranes.

Reprinted by permission from Macmil-
lan Publishers Ltd: Nature Reviews 
Microbiology, Cabeen et al., 3(8), 601–610, 
copyright 2005.

Bacteraemia: Bacteria circulating in the
bloodstream.
Bacteriocidal: Kills bacteria both in and out
of the replication cycle.
Bacteriostatic: Stops replication without killing existing bacteria.
Capsulate bacteria: Bacteria with a thick outer capsule, eg Haemophilus inﬂ uen-
zae, Neisseria meningitidis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. These are destroyed 
in the spleen. Following splenectomy (or splenic infarction, eg sickle cell anaemia) 
there is an increased risk of infection by capsulate bacteria and prophylactic vac-
cination should be off ered (p407).
Commensal: An organism that lives in/on a host without causing harm.
Endotoxin: A lipopolysaccharide complex found on the outer membrane of Gram-
negative bacteria. Can elicit an inﬂ ammatory response. Activates complement via 
the alternative pathway.
Enterotoxin: Exotoxin that targets the gut, eg Clostridium difﬁ cile toxin (p411).
Exotoxin:  Toxins  secreted  by  bacteria  acting  at  a  site  distant  from  bacterial 
growth. Production of an exotoxin can determine virulence, eg botulinum, tetanus, 
diphtheria, shiga toxins.
Flagella: A tail-like appendage that moves to propel the bacterium, eg Helico-
bacter pylori.
Nosocomial: Acquired in a hospital/healthcare setting (pp410–1).
Obligate intracellular: Bacteria that can only survive in host cells  induce a cell-
mediated immune response and will not grow on standard culture media.
Ziehl–Neelsen stain: Mycolic acid in the cell wall of mycobacteria resists Gram 
staining but will appear red with acid-fast techniques (= acid-fast stain). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   382

_OHCM_10e.indb   382

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
383

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Antibiotics: action and resistance
The antibiotic revolution began in 1928 when a extraordinary series of fortuitous 
events (including a cancelled holiday and an unpredictable British summer) led to 
Alexander Fleming’s observation that a contaminating Penicillium colony caused 
lysis  of  staphylococci.  Mass  production  and  the  ‘golden  age’  of  antibiotics  fol-
lowed, with the introduction of a variety of drugs selectively toxic to bacterial, but 
not mammalian cells. This is achieved by:
  • utilizing a target unique to bacteria, eg cell wall
  • selectively targeting bacterial-speciﬁ c components, eg enzymes, ribosomes
  • preventing transport of the drug into human cells, eg metronidazole can only be 

transported into anaerobic bacteria.

The mechanism of action of diff erent classes of antibiotic is shown in ﬁ g 9.4.

Folate synthesis
Sulfamethoxazole
Trimethoprim

Cell wall synthesis

β–lactams 
Penicillins
Cephalosporins
Carbapenems

Glycopeptides
Vancomycin
Teicoplanin

Polymyxins
Colistin

THF A

DHF A

PABA

50S

30S

30S subunit
Aminoglycosides
Tetracyclines

Nucleic acid
synthesis

DNA synthesis
Fluoroquinolones
Metronidazole

RNA polymerase
Rifamycins

50S subunit
Macrolides
Clindamycin
Linezolid
Chloramphenicol
Fusidic acid

Protein synthesis

Fig 9.4  Classes of antibiotics and their bacterial cell targets.

This spectrum of available antibiotics revolutionized clinical practice and led to 
the declaration: ‘It is time to close the book on infectious diseases, and declare 
the  war  against  pestilence  won’  (attributed  in  urban  legend  to  Dr.  William  H 
Stewart, US Surgeon General, 1965–1969). Such conﬁ dence failed to consider that 
the capacity for a prokaryotic micro-organism to develop resistance far outstrips 
the human capacity to develop new antibiotic drugs.
Antibiotic resistance can be:
  • Intrinsic: due to inherent structural or functional characteristics, eg vancomycin 

cannot cross the outer membrane of Gram-negative organisms.

  • Acquired: bacteria have been evolving to resist antibacterial agents for billions 
of years through mutation and/or the transfer of resistance properties. This evo-
lutionary phenomenon is accelerated by selection pressure from antibiotic use 
(including agriculture, aquaculture, and horticulture) which provides a competi-
tive advantage for mutated, resistant strains.

Resistance has emerged for all known antibiotics causing morbidity, mortality, 
and a huge cost burden worldwide.1 Misadventure is evident. Quinolones are syn-
thetic, resistance cannot be acquired in nature, and yet it is epidemic.
Which  brings  us  back  to  Alexander  Fleming  who,  within  2  years  of  the  mass-
production of his ‘miracle-mould’, gave this sage warning in his Nobel lecture of 
1945: ‘Mr X has a sore throat. He buys some penicillin and gives himself, not 
enough to kill the streptococci, but enough to educate them to resist penicillin. 
He then infects his wife. Mrs X gets pneumonia and is treated with penicillin. As 
the streptococci are now resistant to penicillin the treatment fails. Mrs X dies. 
Who is primarily responsible for Mrs X’s death? Why Mr X, whose negligent use 
of penicillin changed the nature of the microbe.’

_OHCM_10e.indb   383

_OHCM_10e.indb   383

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
384

Antibiotics 

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

A guide to antibiotic prescribing
 Give antibiotics immediately in patients with a systemic inﬂ ammatory response 
to infection. See ‘Sepsis’, p792.
Start smart:

1      Do not prescribe2 antibiotics in the absence of clinical evidence of bacterial infec-

tion, or for a self-limiting condition. Take time to discuss:
  • why an antibiotic is not the best option
  • alternative options, eg symptomatic treatment, delayed prescribing
  • the views and expectations of the patient
  • safety-netting advice: what the patient should do if their condition deteriorates.

2      Take microbiological samples before prescribing,1 especially for:

  • hospital in-patients: review your prescription as soon as MC&S result is available
  • recurrent or persistent infection
  • non-severe infection: consider if your prescription can wait for MC&S results.
3      Follow local guidelines ﬁ rst: best practice is informed by local epidemiology and 

sensitivities.

4      Consider beneﬁ t and harm for each individual patient:

  • Allergies: clarify the patient’s reaction—the true incidence of penicillin allergy 
in patients who report that they are allergic is <10%. In those with a conﬁ rmed 
penicillin allergy, cross-reactivity with 3rd-generation cephalosporins and car-
bapenems is possible but rare (<1%).

  • Dose adjust for renal function and weight: use ideal body weight in extremes of 

BMI (or ideal weight plus a % of excess weight—see local guidelines).

  • Check for medication interactions.
  • In pregnancy and lactation, see p17.

5      Prescribe the shortest eff ective course. Most antibiotics have good oral avail-
ability. Use IV antibiotics only if in line with local or national (sepsis) guidelines.

Then focus:
Review the clinical diagnosis and continuing need for antibiotics at 48h for all in-
patients and all patients prescribed IV antibiotics:
  • Stop antibiotics if there is no evidence of infection.
  • Switch from IV to oral whenever possible.
  • Change to a narrower spectrum antibiotic whenever possible.
  • Continue regular clinical review whilst antibiotics are prescribed.

Antimicrobial stewardship
In England between 2010 and 2014, antibiotic prescribing rose by 4% in general 
practice, 12% in hospitals, and 32% in other healthcare settings; E. coli resistance 
to ciproﬂ oxacin increased by 18%, to cephalosporins by 28%, and to gentamicin 
by 27%. 25 000 people in Europe die every year from antibiotic-resistant bacteria. 
Each year ~500 000 develop drug-resistant TB. Cost is the only barrier to buying 
carbapenems over-the-counter in Egypt, India, and Pakistan.
‘This will be a post-antibiotic era. In terms of new replacement antibiotics, the 
pipeline is virtually dry, especially for Gram negative bacteria. The cupboard is 
nearly bare. Prospects for turning this situation around look dim.’

Dr M Chan, Director-General of WHO, March 2012.

Antimicrobial stewardship2 is necessary in all healthcare settings:
  • monitoring,  evaluation,  and  feedback  on  antimicrobial  prescribing,  bench-

marked against up-to-date local and national guidelines

  • evaluation of high/low levels of prescribing and prescribing outside of guidelines
  • review of patient safety events: avoidable infection, drug reactions, complica-

tions of antibiotic therapy, eg MRSA (p388), C. difﬁ cile (p259, p411)
  • education and decision support systems for all antibiotic prescribers
  • antibiotic pack sizes that correspond to appropriate course lengths
  • regular review of all antimicrobial policy, treatment, and prophylaxis guidelines.

1  Clinical diagnosis of low-severity community-acquired pneumonia is an exception, see also UTI p296.

_OHCM_10e.indb   384

_OHCM_10e.indb   384

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
385

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Inhibitors of cell wall synthesis
See ﬁ g 9.4. The bacterial cell wall is unique in nature and therefore acts as a selective 
target for antibiotics. Antibiotics which act on the cell wall include:
  • -lactam antibiotics
  • others: glycopeptides, polymyxins.
-lactams: penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems, monobactam
Contain a -lactam ring which inhibits the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links 
in the bacterial cell wall. Resistance occurs when the bacteria (eg staphylococci) 
produce a -lactamase enzyme.
Penicillins:
See table 9.3. Include natural penicillins (penicillin G and V) and synthetic penicillins 
which are chemically modiﬁ ed to extend their spectrum of activity, eg amoxicillin, 
piperacillin.

In an attempt to overcome -lactamase resistance, penicillins have been combined 
with -lactamase inhibitors to create -lactam--lactamase inhibitor combinations  
eg co-amoxiclav (amoxicillin+clavulanic acid), Tazocin® (piperacillin+tazobactam).

Staphylococcal resistance is conventionally deﬁ ned by stability to meticillin, an 

acid-labile and IV-only equivalent of ﬂ ucloxacillin (see MRSA p388).
Cephalosporins:
See table 9.4. Contain a -lactam ring attached to a six-membered nuclear structure 
(ﬁ ve in penicillin), which allows synthetic modiﬁ cation at two sites (one in penicil-
lin). This means that cephalosporins are the largest groups of available antibiotics. 
Classiﬁ cation into ‘generations’ is not standardized: as a rough rule, the higher the 
generation, the wider the spectrum.
Carbapenems:
See table 9.5. Broadest spectrum of all -lactam antibiotics. Seek expert microbiol-
ogy advice before use.
Monobactam:
Aztreonam is only active against Gram-negative species including Neisseria men-
ingitidis, Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae, Pseudomonas. Given IV/IM. Inhaled preparation 
for chronic pulmonary Pseudomonas (cystic ﬁ brosis). Dose adjust for renal function. 
SEs: N&V, GI bleed, rash, LFTS, plts, paraesthesia, seizures, bronchospasm.
Non--lactam cell wall inhibitors
See ﬁ g 9.4 and table 9.6. Includes glycopeptides, eg vancomycin, teicoplanin, and 
polymyxins, eg colistin.
Inhibitors of protein synthesis
See ﬁ g 9.4 and table 9.7. Includes:
  • aminoglycosides
  • macrolides
  • tetracyclines and derivatives of tetracycline
  • others: clindamycin, linezolid, chloramphenicol, fusidic acid.
Inhibitors of nucleic acid synthesis
See ﬁ g 9.4 and table 9.8. Includes:
  • folate synthesis inhibitors: trimethoprim, co-trimoxazole
  • ﬂ uoroquinolones
  • others: metronidazole, rifampicin.
Nitrofurantoin is unique. Metabolites interfere with cell growth via ribosomes, DNA, 
RNA, and cell wall. Multiple sites of attack means resistance. Concentrates in the 
urine (but not if GFR), used in uncomplicated UTI. SES: haemolysis, pulmonary ﬁ brosis, 
hepatotoxicity.
Antibiotics for TB, see pp394–5.

_OHCM_10e.indb   385

_OHCM_10e.indb   385

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
386

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Antibiotics: summary tables
Table 9.3  Penicillins
Antibiotic
Penicillin G
(benzylpenicillin,
‘penicillin’)

Indications 
Gram +ve: streptococci (chest, 
throat, endocarditis, cellulitis), 
meningococcus, diphtheria, an-
thrax, leptospirosis, Lyme disease.
Prophylaxis: splenectomy/hypo-
splenism, rheumatic heart disease. 
Amino acid side chain extends 
penicillin spectrum to include 
enterobacteria (but  activity 
against Gram +ve): URTI, sinusitis, 
chest, otitis media, UTI, H. pylori.
Used if resistance to narrower-
spectrum antibiotics: chest, 
pyelonephritis, cellulitis, bone. 

Penicillin V
(phenoxymethylpenicillin)
Ampicillin/amoxicillin

Amoxicillin+clavulanic 
acid (co-amoxiclav)

Piperacillin+tazobactam Broad spectrum including Gram 

+ve, Gram Ωve, Pseudomonas: 
neutropenic sepsis, hospital-
acquired/complicated infection.

Flucloxacillin

-lactamase resistant, Staphy-
lococcus: skin, bone, post-viral 
pneumonia.

Considerations
Give IV, poor oral absorp-
tion. Dose adjust for GFR.
SE: allergy, rash, N&V, C. 
difﬁ cile, cholestasis. 
Oral bioavailability may 
vary.
Ampicillin IV, amoxicillin 
PO. Dose adjust for GFR.
SE: as per penicillin G, rash 
with EBV.

Dose adjust for GFR.
SE: as per amoxicillin.

Tazobactam has 
penetration of blood–
brain barrier. Dose adjust 
for GFR.
SE: as per penicillin G. 
Myelosuppression with 
prolonged use (rare). 
Dose adjust for GFR.
SE: allergy, rash, N&V, 
cholestasis.

Table 9.4  Cephalosporins
Antibiotic
Cefalexin
(1st generation)
Cefuroxime
(2nd generation)
Cefotaxime
(3rd generation)
Ceftriaxone
(3rd generation)
Ceftazidime
(3rd generation)

Indications
Gram +ve infection: UTI, pneumonia.

Gram +ve and Gram Ωve (Enterobacteriace-
ae, H. inﬂ uenzae): UTI, sinusitis, skin, wound. 
Broad spectrum (not Pseudomonas, Entero-
coccus spp, Bacteroides).
Meningococcus. Broad spectrum (not Pseu-
domonas, Enterococcus spp, Bacteroides).
Broad spectrum including Pseudomonas but
 activity against Gram +ve: empirical treat-
ment of neutropenic sepsis.

Considerations
First-line use in 
UK due to risk of C. 
difﬁ cile.
Caution: false +ve 
urinary glucose and 
Coomb’s test.
SE: allergy, rash, 
N&V, cholestasis. 
Ceftriaxone can 
precipitate in urinary 
tract and biliary tree = 
pseudolithiasis. 

Table 9.5  Carbapenems
Antibiotic
Imipenem
Meropenem
Ertapenem

Indications
Broad spectrum (Gram +ve, Gram 
Ωve, aerobes, anaerobes): hospital-
acquired/ventilator-associated/
complicated infection, neutropenic 
sepsis. 

Considerations
Dose adjust for GFR. Imipenem 
given with cilastatin to renal 
metabolism.
SE: N&V, C. difﬁ cile, rash, eosino-
philia, plts, LFTs, seizures. 

Indication

Table 9.6  Lipopeptides and polymyxins
Antibiotic
Lipopeptides
Vancomycin
Teicoplanin

Complicated Gram +ve 
including MRSA. Oral for C. 
difﬁ cile (not absorbed). 

Considerations

Dose IV to trough serum concentration. SEs: 
nephrotoxic (monitor creatinine, care with 
other nephrotoxics) ototoxic, plts.

Polymyxins
Colistin, 
polymyxin B

Multi-resistant Gram Ωve.  Nephrotoxicity in ~50%. Inhaled colistin for 

ventilator-associated pneumonia. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   386

_OHCM_10e.indb   386

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Table 9.7  Inhibitors of protein synthesis
Antibiotic
Aminoglycosides
Gentamicin

Indications

Tobramycin
Amikacin

Macrolides
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Erythromycin

Gram Ωve infection (activity 
against most Gram +ve and 
anaerobes). Tobramycin has 
activity against Pseudomonas. 
Amikacin has least resistance.

Gram +ve cocci (not enterococci 
and staphylococci), syphilis, chla-
mydia. 

Tetracyclines and derivatives
Tetracycline

Doxycycline

Tigecycline

Other
Clindamycin

Linezolid

Exacerbation COPD, chlamydia, 
Lyme disease, mycoplasma, rick-
ettsiae, brucella, anthrax, syphi-
lis, MRSA, malaria prophylaxis. 

Gram +ve and Gram Ωve includ-
ing -lactam-resistant strains.

Gram +ve cocci (not enterococci), 
MRSA, anaerobes. 
Gram +ve cocci, MRSA, VRE, 
anaerobes, mycobacteria.

Chloramphenicol Gram +ve, Gram Ωve, anaerobes, 
mycoplasma, chlamydia, conjunc-
tivitis (topical).
Staphylococci.

Fusidic acid

Table 9.8  Inhibitors of nucleic acid synthesis
Antibiotic
Folate synthesis inhibitors
Trimethoprim

Indications

Gram Ωve: UTI, prostatitis.

Co-trimoxazole
(sulfamethoxa-
zole + trimetho-
prim)

Pneumocystis jirovecii, GI 
infection (eg Shigella, E. coli), 
protozoans (eg Cyclospora), 
listeria, nocardia, MRSA. 

387

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Considerations

SEs: nephrotoxic (monitor drug 
levels and serum creatinine), 
vestibular toxicity, ototoxicity.

SEs ( with erythromycin): GI, 
cholestasis, QT.
Cytochrome P450 inhibition ( 
with azithromycin): warfarin, 
rhabdomyolysis with statins, 
calcineurin inhibitor levels.

CI: pregnancy, <8y (teeth/bones).
SEs: N&V, C. difﬁ cile, fatty liver, 
idiopathic intracranial hyperten-
sion. 
Dose adjust in liver dysfunction. 
SEs: N&V, photosensitivity, LFTs.

 risk C. difﬁ cile. 

MAOI: check interactions, myelo-
suppression, optic neuropathy.
Systemic use limited by myelo-
suppression. 

SES: GI, LFTs.

Considerations

Inhibits creatinine secretion: 
serum creatinine without GFR.
Synergistic combination. Good 
oral absorption and tissue/
CSF penetration. SEs: folate 
deﬁ ciency, K+, rash, myelosup-
pression, haemolysis with G6PD 
deﬁ ciency.

Fluoroquinolones
Ciproﬂ oxacin
Levoﬂ oxacin
Moxiﬂ oxacin

Others
Metronidazole

Broad including Pseudomonas: 
UTI, prostatitis, atypical and 
hospital-acquired chest infection, 
infectious diarrhoea. 

SEs: GI irritation, CNS eff ects ( 
seizure threshold, headache, 
drowsiness, mood change), pe-
ripheral neuropathy, tendinopa-
thy (Achilles), QT, C. difﬁ cile. 

Anaerobic infection: intra-ab-
dominal, pelvic, oral, soft-tissue. 
Bacterial vaginosis. C. difﬁ cile. 

Rifamycins:
rifampicin,
rifabutin,
rifapentine

Mycobacteria (TB, atypical 
mycobacteria, leprosy), some 
staphylococci, Legionella, menin-
gococcal prophylaxis. 

Good oral absorption. Dose 
adjust for liver function. SEs: 
Disulﬁ ram reaction with alcohol, 
inhibits warfarin metabolism.
SEs: hepatitis (monitor LFTs), GI, 
CNS eff ects, myelosuppression, 
red secretions (urine, saliva, 
sweat, sputum, tears). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   387

_OHCM_10e.indb   387

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
388

Gram-positive bacteria

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Gram-positive cocci
Staphylococci:
Staphylococci are skin/nasal commensals in ~80% of adults. They can also cause 
infectious disease. This produces a diagnostic challenge: are the detected organisms 
causing infection or a contaminating commensal? The answer may lie in the pres-
ence or absence of coagulase, an enzyme which coagulates plasma.

Coagulase-negative staphylococci: eg Staphylococcus epidermidis are less viru-
lent. Pathogenicity is likely only if there is underlying immune system dysfunction or 
foreign material (prosthetic valve/joint, IV line, PD catheter, pacemaker).
Staphylococcus aureus is coagulase positive. Presentation:

1      Toxin release causes disease distant from infection. Includes:

  • scalded skin syndrome—bullae and desquamation due to epidermolytic toxins 

(no mucosal disease, skin loss compared to toxic epidermal necrolysis)

  • preformed toxin in food—sudden D&V (p428)
  • toxic shock—fever, confusion, rash, diarrhoea, BP, AKI, multiorgan dysfunction.

Tampon associated or occurs with (minor) local infection.

2      Local tissue destruction: impetigo, cellulitis, mastitis, septic arthritis, osteomy-

elitis, abscess, pneumonia, UTI.

3      Haematogenous spread: bacteraemia, endocarditis, ‘metastatic’ seeding.

Diagnosis: positive culture from relevant site of infection. Treatment: Sepsis, see 
p792. Drain infected foci, antibiotic (topical/oral/IV) based on illness severity and risk 
factors. Consider local epidemiology of resistance. If systemic treatment indicated, 
use -lactam whenever possible (may need to cover resistant strains until sensitiv-
ity available). Preformed toxin in food: supportive, antibiotics not usually indicated.

Resistant Staphylococcus aureus: MRSA, VISA, VRSA
Staph.  aureus  which produces  -lactamase, or an altered enzyme responsible 
for cell wall formation, will be resistant to -lactam antibiotics (penicillins, cepha-
losporins, carbapenems, see p385). Resistance is usually deﬁ ned by stability to 
meticillin, ie meticillin-resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA). Vancomycin resistance also 
exists and is classiﬁ ed according to the amount of vancomycin needed to inhibit 
bacterial growth: vancomycin-intermediate Staph. aureus (VISA) and vancomy-
cin-resistant  Staph.  aureus  (VRSA).  Resistant  staphylococci  cause    morbidity 
and mortality compared to sensitive strains. Risk factors for colonization include: 
antibiotic exposure, hospital stay, surgery, nursing home residence. Treatment of 
infection (not colonization): vancomycin (for MRSA), teicoplanin. Oral agents with 
activity against MRSA include clindamycin, co-trimoxazole, doxycycline, linezolid. 
Prevention: surveillance, barrier precautions, hand-hygiene, decolonization (mupi-
rocin 2%, chlorhexidine, tea tree oil), antimicrobial stewardship. See p384, pp410–11.

Streptococci:
Classiﬁ cation based on Lanceﬁ eld group persists in terminology (ﬁ g 9.5). Includes:
  • Streptococcus pyogenes (-haemolytic group A): colonizes throat, skin, anogenital 
tract. Range of infection: tonsillitis, pharyngitis, scarlet fever, impetigo, erysipelas, 
cellulitis, pneumonia, peripartum sepsis, necrotizing fasciitis. All canstreptococcal 
toxic shock = sudden-onset BP, multiorgan failure. Post-infectious complications 
rare: rheumatic fever (p142), glomerulonephritis (p310). Treatment: penicillin.

  • Streptococcus agalactiae (-haemolytic group B): neonatal and peurperal infec-
tion, skin, soft tissue. Invasive disease (bacteraemia, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, 
septic arthritis, meningitis) usually has risk factors: DM, malignancy, chronic dis-
ease. Treatment: penicillin, macrolide, cephalosporin, chloramphenicol.

  • Streptococcus milleri: if found in blood culture look for an abscess—mouth, liver, 

lung, brain. Treatment: penicillin.

  • Streptococcus pneumoniae: pneumonia (pp166–8), otitis media, meningitis, septi-
caemia. Treatment: penicillin. Vaccination: childhood, hyposplenism, >65y (p407).
  • Viridans streptococci: commonest cause of oral/dental origin endocarditis (p150).
  • Streptococcus bovis: bacteraemiaendocarditis. Look for colon/liver disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   388

_OHCM_10e.indb   388

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
389

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Enterococci:
Gut  commensal.  Resistance  to  cephalosporins  and  quinolones  leads  to  nosocomial 
colonization and infection. Most common is Enterococcus faecalis: if found in blood 
culture, assume endocarditis until proven otherwise. Treatment: intrinsic and acquired 
resistance including vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE). Seek expert help.
Gram-positive bacilli
Listeria:
Caused  by  Listeria  monocytogenes  which  lives  in  soil.  Able  to  multiply  at  low 
temperatures.  Found  in  pâté,  raw  vegetables/salad,  unpasteurized  milk/cheese. 
Presentation:  most  asymptomatic,  or  mild  ﬂ u-like  illness.  In  immunosuppressed 
(including  elderly):  gastroenteritis,  local  infection  (abscess,  osteomyelitis,  septic 
arthritis,  endocarditis,  pneumonia),  meningoencephalitis,  life-threatening  septi-
caemia. Listeria in pregnancy may cause mild disease in mother but transplacental 
infectionplacentitis,  amnionitis,  preterm  delivery,  neonatal  sepsis,  intrauterine 
death. Diagnosis: culture: blood, placenta, amniotic ﬂ uid, CSF. PCR. Serology is non-
speciﬁ c.  Treatment:  ampicillin  plus  gentamicin  (synergistic  action)  for  systemic 
disease. Also co-trimoxazole (CNS disease), macrolides, tetracycline, rifampicin, van-
comycin, carbopenem. Resistant to cephalosporins which are often 1st-line empiri-
cal treatment for meningitis so remember additional antimicrobial cover if listeria 
is a possibility.
Clostridia:
  • Clostridium difﬁ cile, see p259, p411.
  • Clostridium perfringens:

  • Gastroenteritis, see p430.
  • Gas gangrene due to exotoxin production (alpha toxin most common). Previ-
ously Clostridium welchii. Presentation: sudden, severe pain due to myonecro-
sis, tissue crepitus, systemic shock. Most post surgery (GI, biliary), or following 
soft-tissue trauma/open fracture. If spontaneous, look for malignancy. Treat-
ment: early recognition, surgical debridement, protein synthesis inhibitors, eg 
clindamycin inhibit toxins >penicillins. Hyperbaric O2 unproven in trials (ﬁ g 9.4, 
table 9.7).

  • Clostridium botulinum, see p436.
  • Clostridium tetani, see p436.
Diphtheria:
Caused  by  Corynebacterium  diphtheriae  toxin.  Preventable  with  vaccine.  Pres-
entation:  tonsillar  pseudomembrane  with  fever,  painful  dysphagia,  cervical  lym-
phadenopathy (see OHCS p158). Diagnosis: culture, toxin detection, PCR. Treatment: 
antitoxin within 48h. Benzyl penicillin/erythromycin. Airway support.
Actinomycosis:
Due to Actinomyces israelii, a mucous membrane commensal. Presentation: suba-
cute granulomatous/suppurative infection adjacent to mucous membrane. Diag-
nosis:  culture.  ‘Sulphur’  granules  in  pus/tissue  are  pathognomonic.  Treatment: 
antibiotics covering actinomycetes and concomitant microbes.
Nocardia:
Rare cause of disease. Presentation: tropical skin abscess, lung/brain abscess, dis-
seminated infection if immunosuppressed. Treatment: usually co-trimoxazole.
Anthrax: See p424. 

Fig 9.5  Streptococci are grouped by haemolytic pattern (, , 
or non-haemolytic), by Lanceﬁ eld antigen (A–G), or by species. 
Rebecca  Lanceﬁ eld  (1895–1981)  is  shown  with  her  hand  lens, 
typing streptococci with a variety of  M protein-speciﬁ c  anti-
bodies. Her lab became known as the ‘Scotland Yard of Strepto-
coccal Mysteries’ after she found that the most grievous crimes 
of streptococci almost always involve M as a secret accomplice. 
Although she arrested M on many occasions, M outlived her, and 
still stalks our wards and clinics.  

©Dr V Fischetti, Rockefeller University, NY.

_OHCM_10e.indb   389

_OHCM_10e.indb   389

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
390

Gram-negative bacteria 

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Gram-negative cocci
Neisseria:
Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) is an upper respiratory tract commensal in 
~10% (~25% adolescents) adhering to non-ciliated epithelial cells in nasopharynx and 
tonsils. Person-to-person transmission via droplets or upper respiratory tract secre-
tions. Most strains are harmless but induce immunity. Pathogenic, virulent strains 
are mostly encapsulated and have the potential to cause septicaemia and meningitis. 
Serogroups A, B, C, W and Y account for nearly all invasive forms. Group C following 
introduction of vaccination in UK.  in serotype W in UK since 2009. Incubation 2–7d. 
Peak ages: <2yr, ~18yr. Risk factors: complement system defects, hyposplenism, HIV. 
Presentation:

1      Meningitis (~50% cases). Main proliferation of bacteria is in CSF. Insidious onset 
with malaise, nausea, headache, vomiting. May be misdiagnosed as gastroenteri-
tis, URTI, or childhood viral illness. Later meningism: headache, vomiting, nuchal/
back rigidity, photophobia, altered consciousness. Complications in up to 20%: 
sensorineural hearing loss, impaired vestibular function, epilepsy, diff use brain 
injury.

2      Meningococcaemia. Symptoms/signs depends on amount of circulating bacte-
ria. Mild disease presents with fever, macular rash (ﬁ g 9.6) but no signs of shock. 
High-grade meningococcaemia (~30% cases) causes pyrexia and septic shock 
within 6–12h due to rapidly escalating endotoxin levels: circulatory failure, co-
agulopathy with skin haemorrhage (ﬁ g 9.7), thrombosis of extremities/adrenals, 
AKI, ARDS. Meningism may be absent. Complications: amputation, skin necrosis, 
pericarditis, arthritis, ocular infection, pneumonia (especially serotypes Y and W), 
permanent adrenal insuffi  ciency.

Fig 9.6  Macular lesions on legs.

Fig 9.7  Massive skin haemorrhage with fulmi-

nant meningococcal septicaemia.

Reproduced from Warrell et al. Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Reproduced from Warrell et al. Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Diagnosis: Start treatment immediately if meningitis/meningococcal sepsis is 
a possible diagnosis. Do not wait for conﬁ rmation: delay can be deadly. Intra- and 
extracellular diplococci on microscopy of  CSF/blood/skin lesion.  PCR of  CSF/blood/
skin lesion. Treatment: urgent antibiotic treatment: benzylpenicillin, ceftriaxone (see 
pp822–3). Cefotaxime, chloramphenicol, meropenem also bactericidal. Prevention: 
routine infant vaccination against capsular group C in UK. Capsular group B vaccine in 
UK infants since 2015: induces bacteriocidal antibodies, no population data, duration 
of protection unknown. Quadrivalent ACWY vaccine at age 14 and if high-risk travel. 
Additional B, C, ACWY doses if hyposplenism and complement deﬁ ciency. Prophylaxis 
of contacts: ciproﬂ oxacin/ceftriaxone (single dose), or rifampicin 600mg BD for 48h.
Neisseria gonorrhoea: see pp412–3.
Moraxella catarrhalis:
Colonizes upper respiratory tract in children ( in adults). Resembles Neisseria com-
mensal so may be overlooked. Presentation: pneumonia, exacerbation of COPD, up to 
20% of acute otitis media, sinusitis. Bacteraemia is rare. Diagnosis: culture of sputum, 
ear eff usion, sinus aspirate, blood. ‘Hockey puck sign’: colonies can be pushed along 
agar surface without disruption. Treatment: macrolide, cephalosporin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   390

_OHCM_10e.indb   390

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Gram-negative bacilli
Enterobacteriaceae:
Enterobacteriaceae family is large: >50 genera, >170 named species. In the clinical 
setting, 3 species make up 80–95% of isolates:

1      Escherichia coli: part of normal colonic ﬂ ora. Pathogenic forms can cause:

391

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Intestinal disease:
Enterotoxigenic: a major cause of traveller’s diarrhoea (pp428–9).
Enterohaemorrhagic: diarrhoea, haemorrhagic colitis eg O157:H7 (p431).
Enteropathogenic: infants in areas of poor sanitation.
Enteroinvasive: dysentery-like syndrome.
Enteroadherent: traveller’s diarrhoea, chronic diarrhoea in children/HIV.
Extra-intestinal disease: usually patient’s own ﬂ ora that is not pathogenic in the 
intestine but causes disease elsewhere: UTI (pp296–7); neonatal meningitis; noso-
comial infection: pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis. Treat according to sensitivity: 
trimethoprim, ampicillin, cephalosporin, ciproﬂ oxacin, aminoglycoside.

2      Klebsiella  pneumoniae:  colonizes  skin,  nasopharynx,  GI  tract,  hospitalized 
patients. Associated with antibiotic exposure, in-dwelling catheters, immuno-
suppression. Causes pneumonia (necrotizing disease and sepsis if immunosup-
pressed). Also UTI, nasopharyngeal inﬂ ammation. Treat according to sensitivity: 
aminoglycoside, cephalosporin, carbapenem, quinolone.

3      Proteus mirabilis: gut commensal. Causes UTI (pp296–7). Stone formation due 
to urease production: breaks down urea to produce ammonia, struvite stones 
(‘infection stones’) then form in the presence of magnesium, calcium, and phos-
phate (pp638–9).

Other Enterobacteriaceae include Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia: see enteric fever 
(p415), gastroenteritis (pp428–31), plague (p425).
Resistance: widespread antibiotic use has led to the development of highly virulent, 
multiple resistant E. coli and Klebsiella species including:
  • extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL) producing Enterobacteriaceae. Resistant to 
penicillins, cephalosporins, ﬂ uoroquinolones, trimethoprim, tetracycline, with pos-
sible extension to other antibiotic groups

  • carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE).
Resistance requires antimicrobial stewardship (p384), surveillance, robust infection 
control, research into resistance risk and transmission (p383).
Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
Found in environment. Spread by contact/ingestion. Presentation: important cause 
of  nosocomial  infection.  Infection  if  compromised  tissue,  eg  wound,  pneumonia 
with lung disease or ventilation, UTI with catheterization. Septicaemia if immuno-
suppressed. Treatment: options include ceftazidime/carbapenem, aminoglycoside, 
colistin. Combination may be needed. Impermeability of membrane and bioﬁ lm colo-
nization lead to antibiotic resistance. Multidrug-resistance. Seek expert help.
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae:
Divided into encapsulated, typeable forms (a-f); and unencapsulated, non-typeable 
forms. Upper respiratory tract carriage, transmitted by droplets.  H.  inﬂ uenzae  b 
(Hib)  causes  meningitis,  epiglottitis,  otitis  media,  pneumonia,  cellulitis,  septic  ar-
thritis, and bacteraemia. Fatal in ~5%. Routine immunization in childhood and sple-
nectomy/hyposplenism (p407). Non-typeable forms cause pneumonia and sinusitis. 
Treatment: amoxicillin, macrolide, cephalosporin, chloramphenicol, rifampicin.
Whooping cough:
Bordetella pertussis. Presentation: catarrhal phase 1–2wk, then paroxysmal cough-
ing. ‘Whoop’ is a breath through partially closed vocal cords, seen mainly in children. 
Cough is prolonged (‘100 day cough’). Infants have complications/mortality. Diag-
nosis:  PCR  nasal/throat  swab.  Culture  sensitivity  10–60%.  Treatment:  macrolides 
infectivity, but may not alter disease course. Routine childhood vaccination. Vac-
cination in pregnancy placental antibody transfer to protect neonate (p407).
Other:
Brucellosis (p424), cholera (p430), melioidosis (p414).

_OHCM_10e.indb   391

_OHCM_10e.indb   391

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
392

Tuberculosis (TB): presentation

Epidemiology
  • 9.6 million new cases/yr of which 37% are unreported/undiagnosed (ﬁ g 9.8).
  • 3.3% of new cases, and 20% of previously treated cases are drug resistant (p395).
  • Co-infection with HIV in 12% of new cases.
  • Leading cause of death worldwide, 1.5 million deaths/yr.
  • Eff ective diagnosis and treatment saved 43 million lives between 2000 and 2014.
  • UK: ~8000/yr, ~12 per 100 000. 73% born outside UK, 70% in deprived areas, 30% with 

pulmonary disease wait >4 months from symptoms to treatment.

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.8  Estimated TB incidence rate worldwide.

Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, Global tuberculosis report 2016. © World 
Health Organization 2016. http://www.who.int/tb/publications/global_report/en/

Pathophysiology
Caused by infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Active  infection  occurs  when  containment  by  the  immune  system  (T-cells/mac-
rophages)  is  inadequate.  It  can  arise  from  primary  infection,  or  re-activation  of 
previously  latent  disease.  Transmission  of  TB  is  via  inhalation  of  aerosol  droplets 
containing bacterium. This means only pulmonary disease is communicable.
Latent TB is infection without disease due to persistent immune system containment 
(ie granuloma formation prevents bacteria growth and spread). Positive skin/blood 
testing (p394) shows evidence of infection but the patient is asymptomatic and non-
infectious (normal sputum/CXR). ~2 billion persons worldwide (~⅓ of world’s popula-
tion) are estimated to have latent  TB. Lifetime risk of reactivation is 5–10%. Risk 
factors for reactivation: new infection (<2y), HIV, organ transplantation, immunosup-
pression (including corticosteroids), silicosis, illicit drug use, malnutrition, high-risk 
settings (homeless shelter, prison), low socio-economic status, haemodialysis.
Presentation
TB, or not TB—that is the question. Maintain a high index of suspicion. TB can aff ect 
any organ in the body (table 9.9).
Table 9.9  UK TB case reports by site of disease
Site of disease
Pulmonary
Extra-thoracic lymph nodes
Intra-thoracic lymph nodes
Pleural
Gastrointestinal
Spine
Other bone
Miliary
Meningitis
Genitourinary

Number of cases in UK (%)
4096 (52)
1874 (24)
916 (12)
673 (9)
432 (6)
353 (5)
220 (3)
211 (3)
172 (3)
145 (2)

From: Tuberculosis in the UK 
2014  Report,  Public  Health 
England. www.gov.uk/phe

_OHCM_10e.indb   392

_OHCM_10e.indb   392

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Clinical features of TB
  • Systemic  features:  Low-grade  fever,  anorexia,  weight  loss,  malaise,  night 

393

sweats, clubbing (bronchiectasis), erythema nodosum (p562).

  • Pulmonary  TB:  Cough  (in  ~50%,  >2–3  weeks,  dry  then  productive),  pleurisy, 
haemoptysis (uncommon, seen with bronchiectasis  not always active disease), 
pleural  eff usion.  An  aspergilloma/mycetoma  (p177)  may  form  in  the  cavities. 
Presentation varies and may be silent or atypical, especially with immunosup-
pression, eg HIV, post-transplantation.

  • Tuberculous lymphadenitis: (Usually) painless enlargement of cervical or su-
praclavicular lymph nodes. Axillary and inguinal node involvement less common. 
Coexisting systemic symptoms in 40–50%. Node is typically ﬁ rm to touch and 
not acutely inﬂ amed (‘cold abscess’). Skin can adhere to the underlying mass 
with risk of rupture and sinus formation. Can occur with or without pulmonary 
disease. Investigate with ﬁ ne-needle aspiration, AFB staining, and culture (p394).
  • Gastrointestinal TB: Most disease is ileocaecal. Causes colicky abdominal pain 
and vomiting. Bowel obstruction can occur due to bowel wall thickening, stric-
ture formation, or inﬂ ammatory adhesions. Biopsy is required for diagnosis. Ca-
seation necrosis and an absence of transmural cracks/ﬁ ssures distinguish from 
Crohn’s disease.

  • Spinal  TB: Local pain and bony tenderness for weeks–months. Slow, insidious 
progression. May not present until deformity or neurological symptoms. Look 
for bony destruction, vertebral collapse, and soft tissue abscess (see Pott’s ver-
tebra p708).

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

  • Miliary  TB:  Haematogenous  dissemi-
nation  leads  to  the  formation  of  dis-
crete  foci  (~2mm)  of  granulomatous 
tissue  throughout  the  lung  (‘millet’ 
seed  appearance).  CXR:  ﬁ g  9.9.  Dis-
semination  is  throughout  the  body 
with meningeal involvement in ~25%. 
Sputum  may  be  negative  for  AFB  as 
spread is haematogenous. Have a low 
threshold for  LP. Untreated mortality 
is assumed to be close to 100%. Do not 
delay treatment while test results are 
pending.

  • CNS TB: Haematogenous spread lead-
Fig 9.9  Miliary TB (nodular opacities).
ing  to  foci  of  infection  in  brain  and 
spinal cord. Foci can enlarge to form 
©Dr Vijay Sadasivam, Radiologist, SKS Hosp, Salem, 
Tamil Nadu, India.
tuberculomas.  Foci  rupture  leads  to 
meningitis. Risk with immune suppression, HIV, aged <3y. Headache, meningism, 
confusion, seizures, focal neurological deﬁ cit, and systemic symptoms. Needs LP 
and examination of CSF (leucocytosis, raised protein, CSF: plasma glucose <50%, 
AFB  stain,  PCR  and  culture).  Look  for  TB  elsewhere  (CXR,  etc),  test  for  HIV.  CT/
MRI may show hydrocephalus, basal exudates. Tuberculomas are ring-enhancing. 
All rapid diagnostic tests (p394) have sensitivity, so treat on suspicion.

  • Genitourinary  TB:  Symptoms  may  be  chronic,  intermittent,  or  silent.  Include 
dysuria, frequ ency, loin pain, haematuria, sterile pyuria (see p296). Granuloma 
may cause ﬁ brosis, strictures, infertility, and genital ulceration.

  • Cardiac TB: Usually involves the pericardium: pericarditis, pericardial eff usion, 
and/or constrictive pericarditis (p154). Check chest imaging for other TB pathol-
ogy, eg pulmonary disease, mediastinal lymph nodes. Pericardiectomy may be 
indicated for persistent constriction despite anti-tuberculous treatment. Myo-
cardial involvement (arrhythmias, heart failure, ventricular aneurysm, or outﬂ ow 
obstruction) is rare.

  • Skin: Lupus vulgaris = persistent, progressive, cutaneous TB: red-brown, ‘apple-
jelly’ nodules. Scrofuloderma: skin lesion extended from underlying infection eg 
lymph node, bone; causes ulceration and scarring.

_OHCM_10e.indb   393

_OHCM_10e.indb   393

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
394

Tuberculosis (TB): diagnosis and treatment

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Diagnostic tests for TB
Latent TB:
Off er testing3  to close contacts of those with pulmonary or laryngeal TB, those 
with immune dysfunction, healthcare workers, and high-risk populations, eg pris-
on, homeless, vulnerable migrants.
  • Tuberculin skin testing (TST) = Mantoux test. Intradermal injection of puriﬁ ed 
protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin. Size of skin induration is used to determine 
positivity depending on vaccination history and immune status (>5mm if risk 
factors, >15mm if no risk factors).

  • Interferon-gamma release assays (IGRAS) diagnose exposure to TB by meas-
uring  the  release  of  interferon-gamma  from  T-cells  reacting  to  TB  antigen. 
Speciﬁ city compared to TST if history of BCG vaccination.

Neither test can diagnose or exclude active disease (falsely negative in 20–25% 
of active disease): clinical evaluation is required.
Immune-suppressed states reduce the sensitivity of both tests.
Active pulmonary TB:
  • CXR. Fibronodular/linear opacities in upper lobe (typical), middle or lower lobes 
(atypical),  cavitation,  calciﬁ cation,  miliary  disease  (see  ﬁ g  9.9),  eff usion,  lym-
phadenopathy.

  • Sputum smear. Sputum can be spontaneously produced or induced (with nebu-
lized saline and precautions to prevent transmission). Three specimens are need-
ed including an early-morning sample. It is stained for the presence of acid-fast 
bacilli (AFB). All mycobacteria are ‘acid-fast’ including M. tuberculosis. If AFB are 
seen, treatment should be commenced and the patient isolated (in hospital only 
if clinical indication, or public health reason for admission; or at home).

  • Sputum  culture. More sensitive than smear testing. Culture takes  1–3 weeks 

(liquid media) or 4–8 weeks (solid media). Can assess drug sensitivity.

  • Nucleic acid ampliﬁ cation test (NAAT). Direct detection of M. tuberculosis in 
sputum by DNA or RNA ampliﬁ cation. Rapid diagnosis (<8hrs). Can also detect 
drug resistance (see p395).

Extra-pulmonary TB:
  • Investigate for coexisting pulmonary disease.
  • Obtain material from aspiration or biopsy (lymph node, pleura, bone, synovium, 
GI/GU tract) to enable AFB staining, histological examination (caseating granu-
loma) and/or culture.

  • NAAT can be carried out on any sterile body ﬂ uid, eg CSF, pericardial ﬂ uid.
Offer HIV test for all. 

Treatment
Antibiotics used in the treatment3 of TB are detailed in table 9.10.
Table 9.10  Antibiotics used in the treatment of TB

Antibiotic

Rifampicin

Standard course for 
active disease
2 months intensive
4 months continuation

Isoniazid

2 months intensive
4 months continuation 

Pyrazinamide 2 months intensive
2 months intensive
Ethambutol

Notes

Enzyme inducer: care with warfarin, calcineurin 
inhibitors, oestrogens, phenytoin; body secre-
tions coloured orange-red (includes contact lens 
staining); altered liver function.
Inhibits formation of active pyridoxine (Vit B6) 
which causes a peripheral neuropathy (risk 
with DM, CKD, HIV, malnutrition)  give with 
prophylactic pyridoxine; hepatitis.
Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity, dose if eGFR<30.
Colour blindness, visual acuity, optic neuritis. 
Check visual acuity at start of treatment, moni-
tor for symptoms. Monthly visual check if treat-
ment > 2 months. Monitor levels if eGFR<30.

_OHCM_10e.indb   394

_OHCM_10e.indb   394

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
395

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Latent TB
Balance the risk of development of active disease with the possible side-eff ects of 
treatment. Consider treatment in all at risk of active disease: HIV, transplantation, 
chemotherapy, biological agents eg anti-TNF (see p265), diabetes, CKD including di-
alysis, silicosis, bariatric surgery, and recent close contact with pulmonary/laryngeal 
TB. Off er HIV, hepatitis B and C testing prior to treatment.

Treat with 3 months of isoniazid (with pyridoxine) and rifampicin OR 6 months of 

isoniazid (with pyridoxine).

If concerns about hepatotoxicity then 3 months of isoniazid and rifampicin may be 
preferred. In severe liver disease, seek specialist advice. If interactions with rifamy-
cins are a concern (eg HIV, transplant) then 6 months of isoniazid may be preferred.
Active TB
All forms of active TB are statutorily notiﬁ able in UK. This includes both clinical and 
culture diagnoses. Notiﬁ cation is via your local public health protection team (www.
gov.uk/health-protection-team).Treatment is given under the care of a specialist TB clini-
cian/service according to table 9.10. Exceptions include:
  • active CNS disease (including spinal cord involvement): continuation phase of treat-

ment is extended from 4 to 10 months

  • CNS and pericardial disease: use adjunctive high-dose steroids (with weaning and 

withdrawal during the intensive treatment period)

  • drug-resistant TB.
Adherence is important for treatment to be eff ective and to prevent drug resistance. 
Directly observed therapy (DOT) should be considered if: previous treatment for TB, 
homelessness, drug/alcohol misuse, prison, psychiatric or cognitive disorder, multi-
drug resistant disease, patient request.

Universal access to diagnosis and treatment of TB is part of social justice. WHO has 
developed an ‘End TB’ strategy aiming to reduce TB deaths by 90% by 2030, and TB 
incidence by 90% by 2035 (www.who.int/tb/strategy/en).
Drug-resistant TB
NAAT (p394) for drug resistance should be requested for all patients with risk fac-
tors for drug-resistance: previous TB treatment, contact with drug-resistant disease, 
birth or residence in a country where ≥5% new cases are drug resistant (ﬁ g 9.10). 
Drug resistance may be:
  • to any single agent in table 9.10.
  • multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB): resistant to rifampicin and isoniazid.
  • extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB): resistant to rifampicin, isoniazid, one inject-

able agent (capreomycin, kanamycin or amikacin) and one ﬂ uoroquinolone.

If rifampicin resistance is detected, treat with at least six agents to which the my-
cobacterium is likely to be sensitive. Test for resistance to 2nd-line drugs. Remember 
infection control measures. Seek expert advice for all drug-resistant cases.

Fig 9.10  Percentage of new TB  cases with multi-drug resistant TB.

Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, Global tuberculosis report 2016. © World 
Health Organization 2016. http://www.who.int/tb/publications/global_report/en/

_OHCM_10e.indb   395

_OHCM_10e.indb   395

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
396

Inﬂ uenza

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Inﬂ uenza is common throughout the world, aff ecting ~5–10% of adults, and 20–30% 
of children each year. In most, it is a self-limiting illness. Complications can be life-
threatening in the elderly, pregnant women, and those with chronic disease. There 
are ~4 million cases of severe inﬂ uenza and ~500 000 deaths worldwide/yr.
Seasonal inﬂ uenza
Acute viral infection of lungs and airways. Rapid person-to-person spread by aero-
solized droplets and contact. Infectivity from 1d prior, to ~7d after symptoms. In-
cludes three subtypes of virus: A, B, and C. Type A inﬂ uenza is subdivided according 
to  combinations  of  virus  surface  proteins  eg  A(H1N1),  A(H3N2).  Seasonal  epidemics 
peak  during  the  winter  in  temperate  countries.  Acquired  immunity  is  speciﬁ c  to 
the virus subtype.
Presentation: Incubation:  1–4d. Fever, dry cough, sore throat, coryzal symptoms, 
headache, malaise, myalgia, conjunctivitis, eye pain ± photophobia. Complications 
include pneumonia, exacerbation of chronic lung disease, croup, otitis media, D&V, 
myositis,  encephalitis,  Reye  syndrome  (encephalopathy  +  fatty  degenerative  liver 
failure).
Diagnosis: Clinical: acute onset + cough + fever has positive predictive value >79%. 
Testing limited to outbreaks, and public health surveillance. Includes: viral PCR, rapid 
antigen  testing,  viral  culture  of  clinical  samples  (throat  swab,  nasal  swab,  naso-
pharyngeal washings, sputum).
Treatment:
  • Uncomplicated inﬂ uenza symptomatic treatment eg paracetamol. Antivirals only 

if high risk:

  • Chronic disease: lung, heart, kidney, liver, CNS, DM
  • Immunosuppression:  immunodeﬁ ciency,  current  or  planned  or  within  6 
months of immunosuppressive therapy, CD4 (<200 in adults, <500 if child <5yr)

  • Pregnancy
  • BMI>40

  • >65yr
  • <6 months old.

  • Complicated inﬂ uenza includes lower respiratory tract infection, exacerbation of 
any underlying medical condition, all needing hospital admission. Give antiviral4 
inhibitors of inﬂ uenza neuraminidase:
1      Oseltamivir: PO or NG. Adult dose: 75mg BD. 5d course. 1st line in UK.
2      Zanamivir: inhaled (10mg BD, 5d course, conﬁ rm technique), nebulized, or IV (res-
piratory disease aff ecting nebulizer delivery, ITU). Used if: oseltamivir resistance 
(eg A(H1N1)), poor clinical response to oseltamivir, concerns re GI absorption of 
oseltamivir.

Retrospective observational data, and animal studies of oseltamivir and zanamivir 
show no evidence of harm in pregnancy. Supportive treatment for all. Extracorpor-
eal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been used to support gas exchange in severe 
acute lung injury due to inﬂ uenza.
Prevention:
  • Post-exposure prophylaxis: if high risk (see ‘Treatment’) AND not protected by vac-
cination: oseltamivir PO OD (inhaled zanamivir OD if oseltamivir resistance) for 10d.
  • Annual vaccination in UK: all high risk (see ‘Treatment’), children>2yrs, healthcare 

workers. See p407.
Pandemic inﬂ uenza
Seasonal inﬂ uenza is subject to antigenic drift: small genetic changes during repli-
cation which can be accounted for in the annual vaccine. Antigenic shift is a major 
change  in  inﬂ uenza  A  resulting  in  new  haemgglutinin  (H)  and  neuraminidase  pro-
teins  (N)  for  which  there  is  no  pre-existing  immunity  in  the  population.  Any  non-
human inﬂ uenza viruses which transfer to humans are novel. If they also have, or 
develop,  capacity  for  rapid  human-to-human  transmission  a  pandemic  results. 
Based  on  previous  pandemics,  up  to  50%  of  the  UK  population  may  become  in-
fected leading to 20 000–750 000 excess deaths. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   396

_OHCM_10e.indb   396

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
397

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Sailing the choppy waters of pandemic inﬂ uenza
Pandemic inﬂ uenza is the stormy sea of clinical medicine. Like sailors, we know 
there are deadly challenges to come, but we cannot predict their exact timing 
or nature. To prepare a boat for the tempestuous waters ahead, the mast is key; 
without it the sails are unsupported and progress will ﬂ ounder. The mast of pan-
demic inﬂ uenza is a tall, vertical spar which produces maximum drive through 
the swell, and allows sailors to climb up high to see what the horizon has in store. 
When preparing for pandemic inﬂ uenza, we must make for ourselves a spar of 
principles and plans ﬁ t for the storm ahead:
  • Surveillance, planning, and communication: worldwide inﬂ uenza virological sur-
veillance has been conducted through the WHO for >50yr. It off ers a global alert 
mechanism for viruses with pandemic potential and deﬁ nes methodologies for 
assessing antiviral susceptibility. Cooperation between international and nation-
al public health bodies is required for an understanding of clinical characteristics 
and disease spread. Communication to the individual (public and social media) 
is needed with advice about self-isolation, when and how to seek medical help, 
personal hygiene.

  • Protect: vaccine development and production capacity (stockpiling), adequate 
personal protective equipment (apron, gloves, well-ﬁ tting mask), antiviral ad-
ministration according to robust evidence and sensitivity.

  • Animals: limiting/eliminating the animal reservoir of virus by culling, restricting 

animal movement, vaccination of livestock.

  • Research:  virus  characteristics,  disease  severity  predictors,  epidemiological 
risk  factors,  antiviral  development,  targeting  of  treatment  and  vaccination, 
increased-spectrum vaccines with longer-lasting immunity, eff ective healthcare 
worker protection, evidence-based social distancing measures. 

Hide and seek
In 2009, there was justiﬁ able global concern about a ‘swine ﬂ u’ pandemic. Based 
on  a  Cochrane  review  in  2008,  which  showed  reduced  complications  with  os-
eltamivir, billions were spent stockpiling the drug worldwide.

In fact, the positive conclusion was driven mainly by data from an industry-funded 
summary of 10 trials, of which only two had been published.5 Cochrane needed ac-
cess to these missing data. The ensuing ﬁ ght for information was to take 5 years. 
The off er of a secret contract, with secret terms, and secrecy about methods, was 
declined. These are not acceptable methods for meta-analysis. Inconsistencies be-
gan to arise in conclusions about eff ectiveness. Were people seeing diff erent data, 
or was this simply a close call with two sides separated by a very small fence? Either 
way, being able to see all the data started to become increasingly important. But 
even the largest phase three trial of the drug had never been published. And was 
self-reported pneumonia a useful outcome measure? In December 2009, Cochrane 
could only declare that paucity of data undermined previous ﬁ ndings.

This battle for data became part of ‘Alltrials’: a campaign for transparency in 
clinical trials. ~50% of all clinical trials remain unpublished. The hunt goes on to 
ﬁ nd them. You can run your own drug trial, choose what to publish, and watch 
how the data become skewed at: www.alltrials.net/news/the-economist-publication-bias.

After half a decade, under ceaseless demand, and with the withholding of data 
become increasingly indefensible, the clinical study reports were released. These 
are normally used to provide authorities with a detailed trial report. They are not 
easy fodder for meta-analysis. Assessing 160 000 pages was uncharted territory 
for Cochrane. And the conclusion: oseltamivir shortens symptoms by <1d and hos-
pitalization is not reduced. Other complications were unreliably reported.

The WHO includes oseltamivir on its WHO Model List of Essential Medicines (19th 
edition, 2015) which means it is considered effi  cacious, safe, cost-eff ective, and a 
minimum requirement for basic healthcare. Does this stand up to independent 
scrutiny? The evidence base is certainly tarnished. But a pandemic is not a RCT. 
And the threshold of evidence to reverse policy decisions may be diff erent from 
the threshold needed to introduce them. If a new pandemic looms, millions more 
will be thrown in, for now.

_OHCM_10e.indb   397

_OHCM_10e.indb   397

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
398

Human immunodeﬁ ciency virus (HIV): diagnosis

HIV is a retrovirus which infects and replicates in human lymphocytes (CD4 + T-cells) 
and macrophages. This leads to progressive immune system dysfunction, opportun-
istic infection, and malignancy = Acquired Immunodeﬁ ciency Syndrome (AIDS). The 
virus is transmitted via blood, sexual ﬂ uids, and breast milk. Virus subtypes include 
HIV1 (global epidemic) and HIV2 ( pathogenic, predominantly West Africa).
Epidemiology
~37 million adults and children are estimated to be living with HIV worldwide (ﬁ g 
9.11), with 1.2 million deaths/yr. Africa has most of the disease (~26 million), most 
of the mortality (790 000/yr), and ~1% of the world’s wealth.
UK: estimated ~100 000 living with HIV (=1.9/1000) including 5% of men who have sex 
with men (MSM). ~17% of those with HIV in UK are unaware of their infection.

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.11  Adult HIV prevalence (15–49 years).
Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, ‘Adult HIV prevalence (15–49 years), 2015 by 
WHO region’. ©World Health Organization 2016.
http://gamapserver.who.int/mapLibrary/Files/Maps/HIV_adult_prevalence_2015.png.

Pathophysiology
HIV  binds,  via  its  GP120  envelope  glycoprotein,  to  CD4  receptors  on  helper  T  cells, 
monocytes, and macrophages. These ‘CD4 cells’ migrate to lymphoid tissue where 
the virus replicates, producing billions of new virions. These are released, and in turn 
infect new CD4 cells. As infection progresses, depletion or impaired function of CD4 
cells leads to immune function. HIV is a retrovirus: it encodes reverse transcriptase, 
allowing DNA copies to be produced from viral RNA. This is error prone, meaning a 
signiﬁ cant mutation rate, which contributes to treatment resistance.
Prevention
Sexual  transmission:  Consistent and correct use of (male and female) condoms 
 transmission by ~90%. Serosorting is the restriction of (unprotected) sex depend-
ing on  HIV status. It is unsafe due to inaccuracies in  HIV status (which is only as 
reliable as a person’s last test) and failure to disclose. It does not consider transfer of 
treatment resistance, other STIs, or hepatitis.
Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP): The short-term use of antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
after potential HIV exposure (sexual or occupational) should be considered an emer-
gency method of HIV prevention. Can be given up to 72h (ideally <24h) after exposure. 
Not recommended if exposure is to a person on ART with a conﬁ rmed and sustained 
(>6 months) undetectable (<200 copies/mL) viral load. 1st-line PEP6 in UK is Truvada® 
(tenofovir/emtricitabine) and raltegravir for 28 days (2015) (refer to local guidelines). 
Test for HIV 8–12 weeks after exposure.
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP): The use of ART in those at high risk of acquiring HIV 
including serodiff erent relationships without suppression of viral load, condomless 
anal sex in MSM. Trials (PROUD, IPERGAY) show an 86% reduction in HIV incidence. A 
large scale trial of PrEP provision (2017–2020) will inform future NHS funding decisions.
Vertical transmission: All pregnant women with HIV should have commenced ART 
by  24  weeks’  gestation.  Caesarean  delivery  indicated  if  viral  load >50  copies/mL. 
Neonatal PEP is given from birth to 4wks old with formula-feeding.

_OHCM_10e.indb   398

_OHCM_10e.indb   398

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
399

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Presentation
With symptoms of early HIV infection:
  • Primary HIV infection is symptomatic in ~80%, typically 2–4 weeks after infec-
tion (= seroconversion illness, acute retroviral syndrome). Maintain a high index of 
suspicion. Off er HIV testing to anyone (regardless of risk) presenting with ﬂ u-like 
symptoms  and  an  eythematous/maculopapular  rash.  Consider  primary  HIV  as  a 
diff erential in any combination of fever, rash, myalgia, pharyngitis, mucosal ulcera-
tion, lymphadenopathy, and headache/aseptic meningitis. Diagnosis of primary HIV 
is a unique opportunity to prevent transmission (viral load and genital shedding). 
HIV antibody testing may be negative but HIV RNA levels are high—seek expert help 
regarding viral load testing (see HIV testing later in topic).

  • Persistant generalized lymphadenopathy = swollen/enlarged lymph nodes >1cm 
in two or more non-contiguous sites (not inguinal) persisting for >3 months. Due to 
follicular hyperplasia caused by HIV infection. Exclude TB, infection, and malignancy.

In the asymptomatic, latent phase of chronic HIV infection:
In the UK there is universal testing in sexual health clinics, antenatal services, drug 
dependency programmes, and in patients with TB/hepatitis B/hepatitis C/lymphoma. 
Where HIV prevalence is >2/1000 universal testing by GPs and medical admissions 
units should be considered. Any request for a HIV test should be met.
With complications of immune system dysfunction: See pp400–1.
HIV testing
The prognosis for patients with HIV in the UK is much better than for many other serious 
illness for which doctors routinely test. HIV testing6 should not be viewed diff erently. Any 
doctor can consent for a HIV test: explain the beneﬁ ts of testing and detail how results 
will be given. Written consent is unnecessary. Arrange follow-up with a local HIV/GUM 
service within 2 weeks (preferably <48h) for patients testing positive for the ﬁ rst time.
  • ELISA for HIV antibody and antigen (p24): 4th-generation assays test for HIV an-
tibody and p24 antigen. This reduces the ‘window period’ (time of false-negative 
testing between infection and the production of measurable antigen/antibody) to 
average ~10 days. Diagnosis in UK is conﬁ rmed by a conﬁ rmatory assay.

  • Rapid point-of-care testing: Immunoassay kit which gives a rapid result from a 
ﬁ nger-prick or mouth swab. Only CE-marked kits should be used. Needs serological 
conﬁ rmation.

  • Viral load: Quantiﬁ cation of HIV RNA. Used to monitor response to ART. Not diag-
nostic due to possibility of a false-positive result  care if used to test for sympto-
matic primary HIV in the ‘window period’—conﬁ rmation of seroconversion is still 
required.

  • Nucleic acid testing/viral PCR: Qualitative test for the presence of viral RNA. Used 
to test for vertical transmission in neonates as placental transfer of maternal anti-
bodies can aff ect ELISA antibody testing up to 18 months of age.

  • CD4  count: Cannot diagnose  HIV. Used to monitor immune system function and 
disease progression in patients with HIV. <200 cells/microlitre is one of the deﬁ ning 
criteria for AIDS.

See www.aidsmap.com for available HIV testing and country-speciﬁ c resources.

Needle-stick injury
Risk of HIV transmission from a single needle-stick exposure from a person with 
HIV not on ART is ~1 in 300 (lower than risks of hepatitis B and C transmission).
Prevent:
  • Use ‘safer sharps’ (incorporates a mechanism to minimize accidental injury).
  • Do not recap unprotected medical sharps.
  • When using sharps, ensure there is a disposal container nearby.
Manage:
  • Encourage the wound to bleed, ideally under running water (do not suck).
  • Wash with soap and running water, do not scrub.
  • Seek advice from occupational health/infection control (or A&E outside of work-

ing hours) regarding source testing and post-exposure prophylaxis (p398).

_OHCM_10e.indb   399

_OHCM_10e.indb   399

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
400

Complications of HIV infection

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Complications of HIV can be divided into:
  • complications of immune dysfunction (opportunistic infection/malignancy)
  • complicating comorbidity
  • complications of treatment, ie adverse drug eff ects (see pp402–3).
The diff erential diagnosis for symptoms presenting in a person with HIV is given in 
table 9.11. This is not exhaustive. Do not forget your usual diff erentials, the presen-
tation may not relate to the patient’s HIV status.
Opportunistic disease
ART is part of the treatment regimen of all opportunistic infections (see pp402–3).
  • Pneumocystis  jirovecii:  (‘yee-row-vet-zee’)  Presentation:  progressive  SOB  on 
exertion, malaise, dry cough. Haemoptysis and pleuritic pain rare. Examination: 
respiratory rate, often normal breath sounds. Investigation: SpO2 (compare rest 
and exertion). CXR: classically perihilar inﬁ ltrates (ﬁ g 9.12), but may be normal. In-
duced sputum or  BAL with staining or nucleic acid ampliﬁ cation. Treatment:  IV 
co-trimoxazole (convert to oral if favourable response). 21-day course. Steroids in 
moderate–severe disease (PaO2 <9.3KPa/SpO2 <92%). 2nd-line: clindamycin, penta-
midine, atovaquone. Prophylaxis: co-trimoxazole if CD4 <200 cells/microlitre.

  • Candidiasis: Oral or oesophageal. Pain in the tongue, dysphagia, odynophagia. Di-
agnosed clinically or endoscopically. Treated with systemic ‘-azole’, eg ﬂ uconazole.
  • Cryptococcus neoformans: Commonest systemic fungal infection in HIV (5–10% 
pre-ART). Presentation: meningitis: headache, fever, meningism variable. May be 
associated skin (molluscum-like papules) and lung disease. Investigation: LP with 
manometry. CSF stain (India ink), CSF/blood cryptococcal antigen. Treatment: in-
duction with liposomal amphotericin B (SE: renal tubular damage and AKI). Addition 
of ﬂ ucytosine has shown beneﬁ t in patients not on ART (SE: haematological toxic-
ity). Maintenance treatment with ﬂ uconazole. Normalize ICP with repeat LPs/shunt.
  • Toxoplasma gondii: Toxoplasma abscesses are commonest cause of intracranial 
mass lesions when CD4 <200 cells/microlitre. Presentation: focal neurological signs 
± seizures. Headache and vomiting if raised ICP. Investigation: ring-enhancing le-
sions on MRI ( lymphoma) with associated oedema. CSF PCR for T. gondii is spe-
ciﬁ c but only moderately sensitive. Blood serology is not diagnostic as most cases 
are a reactivation of previous infection. Treatment:  consider in any brain mass 
lesion with CD4 <200 cell/microlitre. Pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, folinic acid.

  • Cytomegalovirus (CMV): Severe primary or reactivated disease (see p405). Presen-
tation: retinitis (blurred then loss of vision), encephalitis, GI disease (oesophagitis, 
colitis), hepatitis, bone marrow suppression, pneumonia. Diagnosis: serial CMV viral 
load, retinal lesions (p438), GI ulceration, ‘owl’s eye’ inclusions on biopsy. Treatment: 
ganciclovir/valganciclovir. Side-eff ects: rash, diarrhoea, bone myelosuppression.
  • Cryptosporidium:  Common  cause  of  chronic  diarrhoea  in  HIV  pre-ART.  Presen-
tation: acute or sub-acute non-bloody, watery diarrhoea. Also cholangitis, pan-
creatitis. Investigation:  stool microscopy (multiple samples as oocyst excretion 
intermittent), PCR, enzyme immunoassay, direct ﬂ uorescent antibody. Treatment: 
supportive, ART.

  • Kaposi’s sarcoma: Most common tumour in HIV and AIDS deﬁ ning. Caused by Ka-
posi sarcoma herpes virus (human herpesvirus 8, p405). Presentation: cutaneous 
or mucosal lesions: patch, plaque, or nodular. Visceral disease less common. In-
vestigation:  histological conﬁ rmation. Treatment:  ART. Intralesional retinoids or 
vinblastine.  Radiotherapy  for  cosmesis/pain.  Chemotherapy  (+ART)  in  advanced 
disease.

  • Lymphoma: Increased risk of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in  HIV. Includes: diff use 
large B-cell lymphoma, Burkitt’s lymphoma, primary CNS lymphoma. Presentation: 
dependent upon area of involvement. Includes lymphadenopathy, cytopenia, CNS 
symptoms. Treatment: combined  ART and chemotherapy. Rituximab for non-CNS 
disease. Whole-brain radiotherapy for CNS disease if excess toxicity with chemo-
therapy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   400

_OHCM_10e.indb   400

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
401

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.12  Bilateral interstitial inﬁ ltrates in P. jirovecii.

Reproduced from Lim, Acute Respiratory Infections, 2012, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

Complicating comorbidity
  • Cardiovascular disease: Increased risk of CVD in HIV. Includes individuals where 
risk traditionally lower: younger age, normotensive, no DM, non-obese. Contrib-
uting factors: dyslipidaemia caused by ART, acceleration of pro-atherosclerotic 
inﬂ ammatory processes by HIV. Management of CV risk factors although no out-
come data to guide speciﬁ c lipid and BP targets in HIV.

  • Bone disease: Increased risk of low bone-mineral density and fragility fractures 
in HIV. Contributing factors: side eff ect of ART, increased prevalence of risk fac-
tors, eg poor nutrition, smoking, alcohol, low vitamin D levels. Risk assess and 
consider bisphosphonate.

  • TB: All patients with TB and HIV need ART (as soon as TB treatment tolerated and 
within 2 weeks if CD4 <100 cells/microlitre). Seek expert advice and refer to local 
guidelines. Consider Truvada® plus efavirenz as 1st line in  UK (serum levels of 
integrase inhibitors are decreased by rifampicin). See ART, pp402–3, TB, pp394–5.
  • Hepatitis B (HBV): Co-infection requires an ART regimen including antivirals with 
anti-HBV activity,  eg  tenofovir  plus  emtricitabine  (not  lamivudine  or  emtricit-
abine as a single agent due to potential for emergence of HBV resistance).

  • Hepatitis C (HCV): Assess all with HIV for HCV treatment. Pegylated interferon effi  -
cacy is less with lower CD4 count. Aim for CD4 >500 cells/microlitre with ART ﬁ rst.

Table 9.11  Diff erential diagnoses in HIV

Presentation
Fever

Diff  erential diagnosis
Intraoral abscess, sinusitis, pneumonia, TB, endocarditis, meningitis, 
encephalitis, pyomyositis, lymphoma, immune-reconstitution after 
commencement of ART, any non-HIV cause.

Lymphadenopathy Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (p399), TB, syphilis, histoplas-

Rash

Cough/SOB

Diarrhoea

Abdominal pain

Dysphagia
Liver enzymes

AKI

Headache/
seizures/focal 
neurology

Eye disease
Peripheral 
neuropathy

mosis, cryptococcus, lymphoma, Kaposi’s sarcoma, local infection.
Drug reaction, herpes zoster, scabies, cutaneous cryptococcus or 
histoplasmosis, Kaposi’s sarcoma, seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Community-acquired pneumonia, Pneumocystis jirovecii, TB, bron-
chial compression (TB, lymphoma, Kaposi’s sarcoma), pulmonary 
Kaposi’s sarcoma (uncommon), cardiac failure (HIV cardiomyopa-
thy, infective pericardial eff usion, HIV vasculopathy).
Salmonella, Shigella, Clostridium difﬁ cile, amoebiasis, Giardia, 
Cryptosporidia, CMV, HIV enteropathy is a diagnosis of exclusion.
TB, CMV colitis, pancreatitis (CMV, TB or secondary to ART).
Do not forget a pregnancy test.
Candidiasis, HSV.
Viral hepatitis (A, B, C, CMV, HSV, EBV), drug-induced liver injury (anti-TB 
or ART), HIV cholangiopathy, lymphoma, congestion due to cardiac 
disease (pericardial eff usion?).
Pre-renal due to sepsis/dehydration, interstitial nephritis secondary 
to medication, HIV-associated nephropathy (proteinuria, CKD).
Meningitis (bacterial, TB, cryptococcal, syphilis), empyema, space-
occupying lesion (toxoplasmosis, lymphoma, tuberculoma), adverse 
drug reaction, HIV encephalopathy, progressive multifocal leukoen-
cephalopathy (PML), stroke (HIV vasculopathy). See p517.
Herpes zoster, CMV retinitis. See pp438–9.
ART, CMV, HIV neuropathy, nutritional deﬁ ciency.

_OHCM_10e.indb   401

_OHCM_10e.indb   401

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
402

HIV: antiretroviral therapy (ART)  

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

 Antiretroviral therapy (ART)7 is recommended for everyone with HIV, regardless 
of CD4 count.
Strategic Timing of AntiRetroviral Treatment (START) study, 2015
4685 participants (215 sites, 35 countries) with  HIV, CD4 >500 cells/microlitre, no 
previous ART. Randomized to:
  • immediate ART
  • deferred ART until CD4 <350 cells/microlitre or AIDS-deﬁ ning illness.
Study was terminated early when an independent interim analysis revealed ben-
eﬁ t to immediate initiation of ART, and recommended that patients on the deferred 
group start  ART. Immediate initiation of  ART reduced the risk of  AIDS, serious 
non-AIDS events, or death by 57% (CI 38–70%) at 3 years.

Aims of ART To reduce the HIV viral load to a level undetectable by standard labora-
tory techniques leading to immunological recovery, reduced clinical progression, and 
reduced mortality. These aims should be met with the least possible side-eff ects.
Mechanism of action (See ﬁ g 9.13.)
  • CCR5 antagonists inhibit the entry of the virus into the cell by blocking the CCR5 

co-receptor.

  • Nucleos(t)ide and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs, NNR-

TIs) inhibit reverse transcriptase and the conversion of viral RNA into DNA.

  • Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs) inhibit integrase and prevent HIV DNA 

integrating into the nucleus.

  • Protease inhibitors (PIs) inhibit protease, an enzyme involved in the maturation 

of virus particles.

  • Pharmacokinetic enhancers/boosters increase the eff ectiveness of antiretroviral 

drugs allowing lower doses eg cobicistat, ritonavir.

Starting treatment Seek expert help.

Infectious
virion

T
T
T

T T

TT

T
T
T

CCR5 antagonist
Entry to cell
T T

T

T
T
T

T

T T

T

T

T

T

T T

T
T
T

TT
Maturation

HIV RNA

NRTI
NNRTI

Reverse
transcriptase

PI

T
T T T
Proteins

HIV DNA

INSTI

Fig 9.13  Mechanism of action of ART.

1      Counselling: HIV transmission and sexual health, beneﬁ ts of therapy (not cure), 
adherence (life long), resistance, side-eff ects of treatment, necessary monitor-
ing, disclosure to partner/family/friends, partner testing.

2      Screen for infections and malignancy (pp400–1). Includes TB, hepatitis B&C. Treat 
or off er prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole if CD4 <200 cells/microlitre. For latent TB 
see p395. Aim to start ART within 2 weeks of initiation of antimicrobial treatment 
for opportunistic or serious infection (seek expert advice if drug interactions or 
intracerebral disease).

3      Baseline tests: CD4, viral load, FBC, LFT, electrolytes, creatinine, pregnancy test, 

viral genotype for drug resistance.

4      Review usual medications for possible drug interactions. Advise the patient to 

check for drug interactions with any new medication.
See www.hiv-druginteractions.org

_OHCM_10e.indb   402

_OHCM_10e.indb   402

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
What to start
Use local guidelines. Get expert help.
For a treatment-naive patient consider two nucleoside reverse transcriptase in-
hibitors (=’NRTI backbone’) plus one of:

403

  • ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor
  • non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
  • integrase inhibitor.

1st line drugs commonly used in the UK include:
  • NRTI  backbone:  Tenofovir  and  emtricitabine  (combination  tablet=Truvada®), 
abacavir and lamivudine (combination tablet=Kivexa®). Side-eff ects: GI distur-
bance, anorexia, pancreatitis, hepatic dysfunction (severe lactic acidosis with 
hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis reported, caution with hepatitis B/C), bone-
mineral density. Avoid abacavir if high risk of CVD. Avoid tenofovir if eGFR <30.
  • Protease inhibitors: Atazanavir, darunavir. Side-eff ects: hyperglycaemia, insulin 
resistance (mainly 1st-generation drugs), dyslipidaemia, jaundice, and hepatitis.
  • NNTRI: Rilpivirine (give with food, interaction with proton pump inhibitors), efa-
virenz  (CNS  toxicity,  association  with  suicidality    care  in  depression/anxiety, 
adverse lipid proﬁ le). Other side-eff ects: rash, GI disturbance.

  • Integrase inhibitor: Dolutegravir, elvitegravir, raltegravir. Side-eff ects: rash, GI 

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

disturbance, insomnia.

Monitor: adherence (see BOX ‘Adherence’), adverse eff ects (LFTs, glucose), virologi-
cal response (viral load). CD4 counts guide prophylaxis of opportunistic infection 
(values may not correlate with virological response, use viral load preferentially).

Adherence
Adherence to ART is associated with drug resistance, disease progression, and 
death. Adherence support should be integral to ART provision.
Assess: Ask about adherence in a non-judgemental way. Do not blame. Explain the 
reasoning behind your questions. Is non-adherence due to practical problems or 
healthcare beliefs? Be ready to address both. What help would your patient like?
Intervene: Normalize the situation—doubts and concerns about ART are common. 
Find time for discussion/information. Address concerns. Simplify the dosage regi-
men, off er a multicompartment medication system. Link the taking of medication 
to  a  regular  daily  activity.  Discuss  side-eff ects:  what  are  the  risks/beneﬁ ts  to 
changing dose or ART regimen? 

Resource-limited settings
In many resource-limited settings, universal access to ART remains an objective 
yet to be achieved. ~50% of those in need of treatment for  HIV do not receive 
it. Interim prioritization of those with symptomatic HIV or CD4 count <350 cells/
microlitre may be appropriate as these patients are at high risk of mortality and 
have most short-term beneﬁ t from ART.
Equality in the treatment of HIV requires:
  • Eff ective, acceptable, and reliable methods to reduce HIV transmission, including 

treatment as prevention.

  • Rapid, accurate, and low-cost diagnosis and monitoring.
  • Standardization and simpliﬁ cation of ART regimens.
  • Evidence-based ART to prevent the use of sub-standard protocols which compro-

mise treatment and lead to the emergence of drug-resistant strains.

  • Reduced ART costs and/or eff ective allocation of resources.

An HIV vaccine?
Vaccines are the most eff ective way to prevent infectious disease. They can also 
be therapeutic, clearing a virus after infection. HIV vaccines to date have failed to 
induce an immune response suffi  cient to confer protection. Research is ongoing 
into neutralizing HIV antibodies, peptides, genes, viral vectors, physiological ‘boost-
ers’, and mechanisms to counter the mutational evolution of HIV. See www.hvtn.org

_OHCM_10e.indb   403

_OHCM_10e.indb   403

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
404

Herpes viruses

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) (human herpesvirus 1 and 2)
Includes HSV1 and HSV2. HSV1 infection in ⅔ of world’s population (~3.7 billion <50yrs), 
and HSV2 in ~11% (~400 million). Viruses multiply in epithelial cells of mucosal surface 
producing vesicles or ulcers. Lifelong latent infection when virus enters sensory neu-
rons at infection site. Can then reactivate, replicate, and infect surrounding tissue. 
Disseminated infection if impaired T-cell immunity: pneumonitis, hepatitis, colitis.
Presentation: Primary infection: subclinical or sensory nerve (tingling) prodrome, 
then vesicles, shallow ulcers. Systemic symptoms possible: fever, malaise, lymphad-
enopathy.  Heals  8–12d.  Reactivation:  usually  severe  unless  immunosuppressed. 
Anatomy of infection:
  • Herpes labialis: cold sore lesion at lip border, predominantly HSV1.
  • Genital herpes: predominantly HSV2 (see p412).
  • Gingivostomatitis: fever, sore throat followed by tender oropharyngeal vesicles.
  • Keratoconjunctivitis: corneal dendritic ulcers. Avoid steroids. See OHCS p416.
  • Herpetic whitlow: painful vesicles on distal phalanx due to inoculation through a 

break in the skin.

  • Herpes encephalitis: most common treatable viral encephalitis. Transfer of virus 
from peripheral site to brain via neuronal transmission. Prodrome: fever, malaise, 
headache, nausea. Then encephalopathy: general/focal signs of cerebral dysfunc-
tion including psychiatric symptoms, seizure, focal neurology (temporal involve-
ment in ~60%), memory loss. Predominantly HSV1 in immunocompetent patients.

  • Secondary infection: eg HSV infection of eczematous skin—eczema herpeticum.
Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis. Conﬁ rmation required in encephalitis, keratoconjunc-
tivits, or immunosuppression: viral PCR of CSF, swab, or vesicle scraping. Also culture, 
immunoﬂ uorescence, serology.
Treatment: Aciclovir: symptoms and viral shedding, will not prevent latent infec-
tion. Give empirical IV aciclovir as soon as HSV encephalitis is suspected, mortality 
~70% in untreated disease (see p824).
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) (human herpesvirus 3)
Primary  infection  transmitted  by  respiratory  droplets.  Incubation  14–21d.  Invades 
respiratory mucosa, replicates in lymph nodes. Disseminates via mononuclear cells 
to infect skin epithelial cells. Leads to virus containing vesicles = chicken pox. Virus 
then remains dormant in sensory nerve roots. Reactivation is dermatomal = shingles.
Presentation:
  • Chicken  pox:  prodrome  1–2d:  fever,  malaise, 
headache, abdominal pain. Then rash (ﬁ g 9.14): 
pruritic, erythematous maculesvesicles, crust 
in  ~48h.  Infectious  1–2d  pre-,  to  5d  post-rash 
development  (lesions  scabbed).  Complications 
 in immunosuppression: encephalitis (cerebel-
lar ataxia), VZV pneumonia, transverse myelitis, 
pericarditis, purpura fulminans/DIC.

  • Shingles:  painful,  hyperaesthetic  area,  then 
macularvesicular  rash  in  dermatomal  distri-
bution.  Disseminated  infection  if  immunosup-
pressed. Infectious until scabs appear. Chicken pox risk in non-immune contacts. 
Complications: post-herpetic neuralgia, Ramsay Hunt syndrome (p501).

Fig 9.14  Chicken pox (VZV).

© D A Warrell.

Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis unless immunosuppressed: viral PCR, culture, immuno-
ﬂ uorescence.
Treatment:  Oral  aciclovir/valaciclovir  for  uncomplicated  chicken  pox/shingles  in 
adults, aim to give within 48h of rash. IV aciclovir if pregnant, immunosuppressed, 
severe/disseminated disease (including ocular).
Prevention: Vaccination: not routine in children in UK, given at aged 70 to prevent 
shingles reactivation. VZV immunoglobulin if non-immune exposure in immunosup-
pression, pregnancy, neonates. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   404

_OHCM_10e.indb   404

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
405

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) (human herpesvirus 4)
Virus targets circulating B lymphocytes (lifelong latent infection) and squamous epi-
thelial cells of oropharynx.
Presentation: Usually asymptomatic infection in childhood. Infectious mononucleosis 
in ~50% of primary infection in adults: sore throat, fever, anorexia, lymphadenopathy 
(esp. posterior triangle of neck), palatal petechiae, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, jaun-
dice. Malaise is prominent. Resolution of symptoms usually within 2 weeks. Chronic 
active infection and recurrence are rare. Oncogenicity: see BOX ‘Oncogenic viruses’.
Diagnosis:
  • Blood ﬁ lm: lymphocytosis. Atypical lymphocytes (large, irregular nuclei) also occur 
in other viral infection (CMV, HIV, par vovirus, dengue), toxoplasmosis, typhus, leukae-
mia, lymphoma, drug reactions, lead poisoning.

  • Heterophile antibody tests (eg Monospot® , Paul-Bunnell) detect non-EBV heterophile 
antibodies which are present in ~85% of infectious mononucleosis sera. False posi-
tive: pregnancy, autoimmune disease, lymphoma/leukaemia.

  • Serology: IgM to EBV viral capsid antigen in acute infection. IgG if past infection.
  • Reverse transcriptase viral PCR.
Treatment:  Supportive. Seek expert help if severe disease/immunosuppression: 
observational data on the use of antivirals and steroids.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) (human herpesvirus 5)
50–100%  of  adults  are  seropositive  depending  on  socioeconomic  and  sexual  risk. 
Latent infection: periodic, asymptomatic (but infectious) viral shedding in bodily ﬂ u-
ids including blood transfusion, transplantation (CMV+ve donor to CMVΩve recipient).
Presentation: Asymptomatic in most. Symptoms mimic infectious mononucleosis 
(see earlier in topic) or hepatitis. Severe disease in immunosuppressed (post-trans-
plantation, HIV): oesophagitis, gastritis, colitis, retinitis (p438), pneumonitis, hepati-
tis. Infection in pregnancy is associated with congenital abnormality.
Diagnosis: Primary infection in immunocompetent: IgM. Immunosuppressed: quan-
titative  nucleic  acid  ampliﬁ cation  testing  (QNAT)  in  blood  greater  than  a  deﬁ ned 
threshold, or rising titre. Invasive disease: tissue QNAT, histopathology.
Treatment:  Given  in  severe  infection/immunosuppression.  Ganciclovir,  valganci-
clovir (oral bioavailability). Foscarnet and cidofovir: nephrotoxicity limit use. Pre-
emptive  treatment  in  transplant  patients  based  on  QNAT  results.  Risk/beneﬁ t  for 
antivirals/immunoglobulin  in  pregnancy  remains  unclear.  Use  CMVΩve,  irradiated 
blood for transfusion if immunosuppressed and at risk: transplant, HIV, leukaemia.
Other herpes viruses
Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6): Roseola infantum, febrile illness without rash.
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8): Oncogenic (see BOX ‘Oncogenic viruses’), Castleman’s 
disease.
Oncogenic viruses
~12% of human cancers are caused by viruses, >80% of these occur in low- and 
middle-income countries (table 9.12).
Common traits of oncoviruses:
  • Virus is necessary but not suffi  cient to cause cancer.
  • Cancers appear in context of chronic infection, taking years-decades to appear.
  • Immune system has variable role: cancers are associated with both immunosup-

pression and chronic inﬂ ammation. 

EBV (HHV4)

Table 9.12  Oncogenic viruses
Cancers
Virus
Burkitt’s lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, B-cell lymphoma in 
immunosuppression, gastric cancer, nasopharyngeal cancer, post-
transplantation lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD)
Kaposi’s sarcoma (p400) and primary eff usion lymphoma
Cancers of: cervix, anus, vulva, penis, head, neck, oropharynx (p406)

HHV8

HPV
Hepatitis B and C Hepatocellular carcinoma (p278)

HTLV-1

MCV

Human T-lymphotropic virusadult T-cell leukaemia
Merkel cell polyomavirusMerkel cell carcinoma

_OHCM_10e.indb   405

_OHCM_10e.indb   405

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
406

Other viruses

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Respiratory tract viruses
Include  rhinovirus,  coronovirus,  adenovirus,  respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV). 
Transmission by direct contact, infected fomites, airborne droplets. Presentation: 
Coryza,  pharyngitis,  croup,  bronchiolitis,  pneumonia.  Diagnosis:  Clinical.  Viral 
culture, antigen detection, PCR. Treatment: None in uncomplicated disease/immu-
nocompetent. Limited evidence for speciﬁ c treatments in high-risk complicated 
disease, immunosuppression: cidofovir for adenovirus; aerosolized ribavarin, im-
munoglobulin, monoclonal antibody in RSV. For inﬂ uenza see pp396–7.
Human papilloma virus (HPV)
>120 HPVs. Pathology:
  • Skin warts, verrucas (HPV 1, 2). Treatment: none, topical salicylic acid, freezing.
  • Anogenital warts (HPV 6, 11). Treatment: topical podophyllin, imiquimod; ablation.
  • Cervical cancer (HPV 16, 18), other cancers (see p405).
Vaccination in UK:  only, age 12–13, HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18 since 2012.
Polyomavirus
~100% exposure. Disease only with immunosuppression: BK virus causes renal trans-
plant nephropathy; JC virus causes progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy.
Measles
Transmitted  by  respiratory  droplets.  Incubation 
10–18d.  Highly  contagious:  >95%  population  cov-
erage needed for ‘herd’ immunity. Presentation: 
Prodrome (2–4d): fever, conjunctivitis, coryza, di-
arrhoea, Koplik spots (white spots on red buccal 
mucosa, ﬁ g 9.15). Then generalized, maculopapu-
lar  rash,  classically  face/necktrunklimbs  (ﬁ g 
9.16). Complications:
  • Secondary infection: bacterial pneumonia, otitis 
media, ocular herpes simplex, oral/GI candidiasis.
  • Acute demyelinating encephalitis: 1 in 1000, usu-
ally within 2wk of rash. Seizures, fever, irritabil-
ity, headache, conscious level.

Fig 9.15  Koplik spots.

Courtesy of CDC.

  • Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis: 5–10yr af-
ter infection, disturbances in intellect, personal-
ity,  seizures,  motor  dysfunction,  decerebration. 
No treatment available.

Fig 9.16  Measles rash.
Reproduced from Gardiner et al., Train-
ing in Paediatrics, 2008, with permis-
sion from Oxford University Press.

Diagnosis:  Clinical.  IgM.  Antigen  in  saliva/urine. 
Treatment:  Prevent  with  vaccination.  Human 
immunoglobulin  within  3d  of  exposure  in  non-
immune. Supportive. No beneﬁ t shown for dexa-
methasone in encephalitis.
Mumps
Respiratory  droplet  spread.  Incubation  14–21d. 
Common  cause  of  encephalitis  pre-vaccination. 
Presentation:  Can  be  subclinical.  Prodrome:  fever,  myalgia,  headache.  Infection 
and  tender  swelling  of  salivary  glands:  parotid  >  submandibular.  Complications: 
meningoencephalitis, epididymo-orchitis if pubertal/post-pubertal infection (warm, 
swollen, tender testes 4d-6wk after parotitissubfertility in ~10%, infertility rare), 
oophoritis,  pancreatitis,  deafness.  Diagnosis:  Clinical.  If  conﬁ rmation  needed  eg 
meningitis/encephalitis: mumps speciﬁ c IgM/IgA, PCR. Treatment: Supportive.
Rubella (German measles)
Respiratory droplet spread. Presentation: Usually mild/subclinical. Prodrome: fever, 
conjunctivitis, rhinorrhoea. Rash: generalized, pink, maculopapular. Lymphadenopa-
thy: occipital, cervical, post-auricular. Congenital infection: Up to 90% risk of fetal 
malformation in 1st trimester, sensorineural hearing loss/retinopathy in 2nd trimester. 
Off er IgM/IgG testing. Immunoglobulin may viraemia but will not prevent infection. 
Vaccinate PRE-pregnancy, live vaccines are contraindicated in pregnancy. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   406

_OHCM_10e.indb   406

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Immunization

Passive  immunity  uses  pre-formed  antibody  to  protect  against  infection.  It  of-
fers immediate but short-lived protection. Natural passive immunity occurs in the 
placental transfer of maternal antibodies to the fetus; acquired passive immunity 
includes treatment with immunoglobulin eg hepatitis B, rabies, tetanus, varicella-
zoster.
Active immunity follows exposure to an antigen, which generates an adaptive im-
mune response. Natural active immunity occurs following infection. Acquired active 
immunity is provided by vaccination. Routine vaccinations in the UK are shown in 
table 9.13. Additional vaccines are off ered to speciﬁ c vulnerable groups (table 9.14). 
Immunosuppression  is  a  contraindication  to  live  vaccines  due  to  the  risk  of  dis-
seminated disease. Includes immunodeﬁ ciency, immunosuppressive treatment, HIV. 
Inactivated vaccines can be given but the antibody response may be less: aim to 
give >2wks prior to immunosuppressive therapy when possible (or vaccinate whilst 
on treatment and considered repeat re-immunization when/if treatment complete).
Table 9.13  UK vaccination summary (*=live vaccine)
Age (m=months, y=years)
2m 3m 4m 12m >2y
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

3–5y 12y  14y
+
+

Vaccination

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

>65y

70y

+

407

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Diphtheria
Tetanus
Pertussis
Poliomyelitis
Haemophilus 
inﬂ uenzae B (Hib)
Pneumococcal
Rotavirus*
Meningitis B

Meningitis C
Measles, mumps, 
rubella*
Inﬂ uenza
HPV 6, 11, 16, 18
Meningitis ACWY
Varicella zoster*

+

+

+

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Pneumococcal

BCG*

Table 9.14   Additional vaccination of speciﬁ c groups in UK (*=live vaccine)
Vaccination 

Off  ered to 
Infants/children where TB incidence >40/100 000 or parent/grand-
parent born in country where incidence >40/100 000, TB contacts.
Hib
Hyposplenism, complement disorders.
Meningitis B, ACWY Hyposplenism, complement disorders.
Inﬂ uenza

Hyposplenism, DM, chronic heart disease, chronic respiratory 
disease, CKD, chronic liver disease, chronic neurological disease, 
immunosuppression, pregnancy.
Hyposplenism, cochlear implants, complement disorders, DM, 
chronic heart disease, chronic respiratory disease, CKD, chronic liver 
disease, chronic neurological disease, immunosuppression.
Chronic liver disease, haemophilia, CKD (hepatitis B only).
Pregnancy 16–32 weeks (neonatal protection).

Hepatitis A, B
Pertussis
Travel
Travel advice (food/drink, insect repellent, malaria prophylaxis, condoms) is more 
important  than  vaccination.  Check  routine  vaccinations  are  up  to  date.  Vaccina-
tion  depends  upon  area  of  travel  and  planned  activities:  BCG (live),  rabies,  yellow 
fever  (live),  hepatitis  A/B,  cholera,  Japanese  encephalitis,  tick-borne  encephalitis, 
typhoid. For up-to-date recommendations see http://www.ﬁ tfortravel.nhs.uk/destinations.

_OHCM_10e.indb   407

_OHCM_10e.indb   407

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
408

Fungi

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Worldwide  in fungal infection with new pathogenicity, virulence, and new infec-
tive mechanisms. Incidence data limited by failures in recognition and diagnosis. 
Divided into superﬁ cial/cutaneous and systemic/invasive.
Superﬁ cial/cutaneous mycoses
  • Dermatophytosis: Dermatophyte fungi digest keratin. Cause infection of skin and 
keratinized structures, eg hair, nails. Presentation: Scale and pruritus. Skin lesion 
may be annular with central healing, eg ring worm, tinea corporis. Tinea pedis af-
fects up to 15% of healthy population: skin erosions and blisters in toe web spaces, 
dry scale on soles. Fungal nail disease = onychomycosis/tinea unguium: discoloura-
tion, nail thickening. Tinea capitis: scalp scaling, alopecia.

  • Superﬁ cial  candidiasis:  Usually  Candida  albicans 
(ﬁ g 9.17), a commensal in mouth, vagina, and GI tract. 
Risk  factors:  immunosuppression,  antibiotic  treat-
ment.  Presentation:  Oropharyngeal:  white  patches 
on  erythematous  background  (plaque  type);  sore,  in-
ﬂ amed areas (erythematous type). GU: soreness, white 
patches/discharge (ﬁ g 9.18). Skin:  usually in folds/in-
terdigital (ﬁ g 9.19).

Fig 9.17  Candida albicans.

Courtesy of P-Y Guillaume.

  • Malassezia: Commensals of greasy skin. Presentation: Pityriasis versicolor: scaly 
hypo/hyperpigmented rash with scaling (ﬁ g 9.20). Seborrhoeic dermatitis: scaling 
of face, scalp (dandruff ), anterior chest. Malassezia folliculitis: itchy, follicular rash 
on back and shoulders ( acne).

Diagnosis: Clinical, microscopy of skin scrapings. Treatment: All superﬁ cial mycos-
es: topical ‘-azole’ antifungal or terbinaﬁ ne 1–4wk. Also topical nystatin and ampho-
tericin in superﬁ cial candidiasis. Tinea capitis: griseofulvin, terbinaﬁ ne, itraconazole. 
Nail infection requires systemic treatment (terbinaﬁ ne, itraconazole) conﬁ rm diag-
nosis, and caution re side-eff ects including hepatotoxicity.
Systemic/invasive mycoses
  • Invasive  candidiasis: Typically occurs in immunocomp romised, comorbidity, or 
ITU  settings.  Genetic  susceptibility  likely  contributes.  Estimated  250 000/yr  with 
50 000 deaths. Candidaemia in ~7/1000 ICU patients. Presentation: Risk factors for 
invasive fungal disease (see p409), febrile with no microbiological evidence of infec-
tion, new murmur, muscle tenderness, skin nodules. Diagnosis: (Repeated) blood/
tissue culture. PCR. Candida in respiratory secretions alone is insuffi  cient. Treat-
ment: Remove all possible catheters. Echinocandins (caspofungin, anidulafungin, 
micafungin),  ﬂ uconazole,  amphotericin  (liposomal  for  renal  toxicity).  Consider 
ﬂ uconazole  prophylaxis  if  risk  factors  for  invasive  disease  (p403).  Consider  em-
pirical treatment if persistent fever, unresponsive to other therapy (discuss with 
microbiologist, choice depends on local epidemiology, comorbidity).

  • Cryptococcus: See HIV p400. Causes meningitis, pneumonia. Presentation: Usu-
ally  immunosuppression,  eg  HIV,  sarcoid,  Hodgkin’s,  haematological  malignancy, 
post-transplant. History may be long, non-speciﬁ c. Headache, confusion, ataxia, 
focal neurological signs, fever, cough, pleuritic pain, SOB. Diagnosis: Indian ink CSF 
stain, culture blood/CSF/BAL, antigen testing in blood/CSF. Treatment: Amphotericin 
+ ﬂ ucytosine, ﬂ uconazole.

  • Histoplasmosis: Worldwide distribution of Histoplasma,  in soil contaminated 
with bird/bat faeces. Illness depends on host immunity, estimated ~1%. Presenta-
tion: Flu-like symptoms, fever, malaise, cough, headache, myalgia, pneumonia, lung 
nodules/cavitation,  pericarditis,  mediastinal  ﬁ brosis/granuloma  (  sarcoid,  TB). 
Diagnosis: Serology, antigen testing. Treatment: Moderate-severe lung disease or 
any CNS involvement: amphotericin, itraconazole.

  • Blastomycosis: Blastomyces in decomposing matter, mainly USA/Canada. Pres-
entation: Fever, cough, night sweats, ARDS. risk of extra-pulmonary disease with 
immunosuppression:  skin,  bone,  GU,  CNS.  Diagnosis:  Culture,  antigen  detection 
(cross-reacts with histoplasmosis). Treatment: Amphotericin, itraconazole.

See also: Fungi and the lung p177, Pneumocystis jirovecii p400. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   408

_OHCM_10e.indb   408

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Invasive fungal infection
Invasion: fungus in normally sterile tissues.
Dissemination: infection of remote organs via haematogenous spread.
Suspect an invasive fungal infection in:

1      Any patient with risk factors (see table 9.15).
2      Any systemically unwell patient who fails to respond to antibiotic therapy.
3      Any persistently febrile patient with no microbiological evidence of infection.

Table 9.15  Risk factors associated with invasive fungal infection. 
Risk factor
Infection

Malignancy
Critical illness

Catheter
Transplantation

Genetic

Surgical

Includes
HIV, CMV, TB, colonization/inadequate treatment of superﬁ cial 
fungal disease, broad-spectrum antibiotics, prior fungal infection.
Neutropenia, mucositis, haematological malignancy.
Mortality prediction score (eg APACHE), prolonged ITU admis-
sion, prolonged ventilation, severe trauma/pancreatitis.
Central venous catheter, urinary catheter, dialysis access, TPN.
Immunosuppressant medication, recent rejection, graft-versus-
host disease.
Hereditary chronic granulomatous disease, abnormalities in 
tumour necrosis factor/interleukins/cytokines.
Major surgery, GI perforation, anastomotic leak, length of 
transplant operation, delayed closure.

409

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Other comorbidity Any disease managed with immunosuppressive therapy, burns.
Data source: Ramana KV et al. Invasive fungal infections. Am J Infectious Diseases and Microbiology 
2013, 1(4);64–69.

Investigations:
  • Blood culture: three samples, diff erent sites, same sitting, aim total 40–60mL blood.
  • Microscopy+immunohistochemistry/ﬂ uorescence depending on site/risk.
  • Other:  antigen/antibody  testing  for  general  (eg  mannan,  galactomannan)  and 
speciﬁ c (eg cryptococcal) fungi; fungal metabolites; PCR: for typing/conﬁ rmation.
Seek expert advice on empirical treatment, agent depends on local epidemiology.

Facts of life for ‘budding’ mycologists

To the uninitiated, fungi are like bacteria, but their chitin cell walls and their knack 
of mitosis puts them in their own kingdom. They are larger than bacteria (eg 8μm 
across), and mostly reproduce by budding of germ tubes (ﬁ g 9.21), not by ﬁ ssion. 
Yeasts occur as single cells or as clusters. Hyphae often occur in a mass of cells 
(called moulds). A hyphal cell with cross-walls is called a mycelium. Some yeasts 
are dimorphic: single cells at 37°C but forming structures called mycelia, contain-
ing fruiting bodies (hyphae), at room temperature. 

Fig 9.18  Candida of the glans.

Fig 9.19  Web-space candida.

Courtesy of P-Y Guillaume.

Courtesy of A Huntley.

Fig 9.20  Pityriasis versicolor.
Reproduced from Lewis-Jones (ed), Paediatric 
Dermatology 2010, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig  9.21  Germ  tubes  emerging  from  di-
mor ph  ic Candida albicans blastospores.

Courtesy of P-Y Guillaume.

_OHCM_10e.indb   409

_OHCM_10e.indb   409

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
410

Healthcare-associated (nosocomial) infection

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Healthcare-associated, or nosocomial, infections include diseases which occur:
  • As a direct result of treatment or contact in a hospital or healthcare setting.
  • As a result of healthcare delivered in the community.
  • Outside a healthcare setting but are brought in by patients, staff , or visitors and 

transmitted to others.

7–25% of hospital admissions are complicated by a nosocomial infection resulting in 
morbidity, mortality, and cost. The causal microbe may be benign in normal circum-
stances, but is able to cause disease when the patient:

1      has been given broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg antibiotic-resistant organisms, 

Clostridium difﬁ cile colitis)

2      is unwell/immunosuppressed (opportunistic infection)
3      has compromised barriers (indwelling catheter/line, ventilation, surgery).

Healthcare-associated infection
Catheter-associated UTI:
A catheter is inserted in ~20% of hospitalized patients. UTI is the most common 
infection acquired as a result of healthcare, accounting for 19% of all healthcare-
associated infection. ~50% of UTIS are associated with a urethral catheter. Risk of 
infection is related to method of catheter insertion, duration of catheter, quality of 
catheter care, and patient susceptibility.
To reduce risk, only catheterize if necessary: Is there obstruction? Do you need 
precise urine output monitoring? Remove as soon as possible. See UTI pp296–7.
Infections associated with the use of intravascular access devices:
Includes  peripheral,  central  venous,  and  arterial  catheters:  tunnelled  and  non-
tunnelled. >60% of bloodstream infections are associated with intravascular de-
vices. Risk is higher with central catheters. Infection can result from introduc-
tion of microbes during insertion, access (eg when giving IV antibiotics), or from 
microbes elsewhere in the body seeding to the foreign material. Organisms include 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  (p388),  Staphylococcus  aureus  (including  meticillin-
resistant forms  MRSA see p388), Candida species (p408), and enterococci (p389).
Ensure  that  vascular  access  devices  are  used  only  when  clinically  indicated. 
Switch to oral treatment (ﬂ uid, medication, nutrition) as soon as clinically ap-
propriate. Treatment includes removal/exchange of the device whenever possible.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP):
VAP  aff ects  up  to  20%  of  patients  admitted  to  intensive  care  units.  Occurs  as 
the endotracheal tube interferes with protective upper airway reﬂ exes and fa-
cilitates microaspiration. Risks  with non-invasive ventilation. In critical illness, 
the oropharynx becomes contaminated with GramΩve bacteria due to antibiotic 
exposure, altered host defences, and changes in mucosal adherence. Access to 
the airway occurs via folds in the endotracheal cuff  and the bacterial bioﬁ lm is 
then propelled to the distal airways. Organisms include Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
(p391), Enterobacteriaceae (p391), and Staphylococcus aureus (p388).
Clinical diagnosis has sensitivity and speciﬁ city. Suspect if new/persistent in-
ﬁ ltrates on CXR plus two or more of: purulent sputum, leucocytosis (>12≈109/L), 
leucopenia (<4≈109/L), temperature >38.3°C.
Prevent by reducing colonization (mouthwash, silver-coated endotracheal tubes), 
nurse at 45° to  aspiration risk, wean off  ventilator as soon as possible..
Surgical site infection:
Aff ects 5% of patients undergoing surgical procedures, contributes to >⅓ of post-
operative  deaths.  Common  organisms  include  Staphylococcus  aureus  (p388), 
Streptococcus pyogenes (p388), and Enterobacteriaceae when surgery involves 
entry to hollow viscera (p391). Prevention methods include hand hygiene, strict 
asepsis, MRSA screening and decolonization, hair removal, peri-operative normo-
thermia, minimally disturbed low adherence/transparent dressings. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   410

_OHCM_10e.indb   410

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Clostridium difﬁ cile
Gram-positive anaerobic bacillus and most common healthcare-associated patho-
gen. Part of colonic ﬂ ora in 2–5% of healthy adults, and 20–40% of hospitalized 
adults. Disease occurs when it converts to a vegetative (growth) state with pro-
duction of enterotoxins A and B, causing colitis. Typically happens when inhibition 
by competing colonic ﬂ ora is lost due to antibiotic exposure.
Presentation: Watery diarrhoea, mildfulminant colitis (pseudomembranes on 
endoscopy=‘pseudomembranous  colitis’),  ileus,  toxic  megacolon.  Consider  in  all 
diarrhoea associated with antibiotic use, especially if marked neutrophilia.
Diagnosis:  Immunoassay  for  glutamate  dehydrogenase  (common  antigen)  de-
tects all strains of C. difﬁ cile. Detection of toxin (toxin immunoassay, toxin gene 
nucleic acid ampliﬁ cation) distinguishes infection from carriage.
Management:  SIGHT: Suspect, Isolate within 2h, Gloves and aprons, Hand wash 
with soap, Test immediately.
  • Mild/moderate: metronidazole PO.
  • Severe (WCC >15≈109/L or AKI or colitis or temperature >38.5oC): vancomycin PO 
(injection preparation can be given orally and is cheaper than capsules) or fidax-
omicin (cost).

  • Non-responders: high-dose vancomycin+IV metronidazole, fidaxomicin, IV immu-

noglubulin (no RCT data).

  • Recurrence: (weaning) vancomycin, ﬁ daxomicin, faecal transplantation.

411

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Management of healthcare-associated infection
Identify: Screening (eg hospital admissions for MRSA) allows isolation and decoloni-
zation before harm. Be alert to new infections.
Protect:  Isolate  multi-antibiotic-resistant  microbes  (eg  MRSA),  highly  transmissi-
ble infections (eg norovirus), and high-risk groups including reverse barrier nurs-
ing (avoids transmission to, rather than from, patients, eg neutropenia). Patients 
with high-risk infections may need negative-pressure rooms (to prevent potentially 
infected air leaving the room), or in severe immunosuppression, positive-pressure 
rooms (to prevent potentially infected air entering the room). When many patients 
have the same nosocomial infection (eg norovirus) they may be barrier nursed to-
gether in dedicated bays.
Treat: Refer to local guidelines, seek expert help. Initial antibiotic choice may diff er 
for healthcare-associated infection.
Prevent: Modify risk factors, eg nutrition, post-operative incentive spirometry to 
reduce pneumonia risk. Use/convert to narrow-spectrum antibiotics whenever pos-
sible. Remove catheters, intravascular access devices, and wean off  ventilators as 
soon as clinically appropriate. Take measures to  person-to-person transmission:

1      Hand  hygiene.  Wash  hands  before  and 
after  each  patient  contact  (ﬁ g  9.22). 
Alcohol-based gels are helpful but soap is 
needed to kill C. difﬁ cile spores.

2      Personal  attire.  In  the  UK  there  is  a 
bare-below-the-elbows policy. Long hair 
should be tied back. In areas where infec-
tion risk is particularly high (theatre, ICU), 
staff  change into scrubs on arrival.

3      Personal protective equipment (PPE).Used 
for  isolated  patients  and  during  proce-
dures.  Includes  gloves,  aprons,  caps,  res-
piratory protection/mask according to risk, 
eg FFP3 respirators in aerosolized infection.

Fig  9.22  Areas  commonly  missed  when 
washing hands.

Contains public sector information licensed 
under Open Government Licence v3.0, www.
whatdotheyknow.com/request/21861/response/56086/

attach/3/04072 Hand Hygiene 5 1.1.pdf

4      Procedures.  Strict  aseptic  techniques  for  any  procedure  which  breaches  the 
body’s defences including insertion/maintenance of invasive devices, IV infusions, 
wound care.

5      Environment. Should be clean and safe, with eff ective decontamination.

System interventions: Up-to-date infection guidelines, audit, education, training.8

_OHCM_10e.indb   411

_OHCM_10e.indb   411

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
412

Sexually transmitted infection (STI)

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

STIS6 are common with increasing rates of diagnosis: ~≈2 for Chlamydia trachoma-
tis, N. gonorrhoeae, genital herpes, and syphilis since 2006. Prevalence highest in 
young adults (<25yr) and MSM. For HIV see pp398–403. For hepatitis B and C see p278.
Taking a sexual history
  • Symptoms: : urethral discharge, dysuria, genital skin problems, testicular pain/
swelling, peri-anal or anal symptoms in MSM. : unusual vaginal discharge, vulval 
skin problems, abdominal pain, dyspareunia, unusual vaginal bleeding (post-coital, 
intermenstrual, consider referral for urgent colposcopy).

  • Exposure: Sexual contacts within last 3 months including sex of partner(s), type 
of contact (oral, vaginal, anal), contraceptive method (properly used?), type and 
duration of relationship, symptoms in partner(s), risk factors for HIV/hepatitis in 
partner(s), whether partner(s) can be contacted. STI history in all. Ask men wheth-
er they have ever had sex with another man.

  • Other: Last menstrual period, menstrual pattern, date of last cervical cytology 
(smear). Current contraceptive, diffi  culties with use/supply. Current/recent anti-
microbial therapy. HPV vaccine history. There may be disclosure of non-consensual 
sex, or intimate partner violence. Do not be afraid to ask for help: ‘Everything you 
tell me today is conﬁ dential unless you tell me something that worries me about 
your safety, at which point I may need to discuss this with another professional 
in order to keep you safe.’

Examination
: retract foreskin, inspect urethral meatus for discharge, scrotal contents/tender-
ness/swelling  (stand  patient  up).  :  vulval  examination  (lithotomy),  speculum  of 
vagina/cervix,  bimanual  examination  for  adnexal  tenderness,  abdomen/pelvis  for 
masses. In all: genitoanal area, protoscopy if anal symptoms, inguinal lymph nodes, 
oral mucosa if orogenital sex. Use a chaperone and document their name.
Urethritis/vaginal discharge See table 9.16.
Genital warts Caused by human papilloma virus (HPV). See p406.
Genital ulcer(s)
  • Genital herpes: HSV. Presentation: ﬂ u-like prodrome, then vesicles/papules around 
genitals, anus, throat. These burst, forming painful shallow ulcers. Also urethral 
discharge, dysuria, urinary retention, proctitis. Diagnosis: PCR. Treatment: analge-
sia, topical lidocaine. Antivirals within 5d: aciclovir, valaciclovir, famciclovir.

  • Syphilis: Treponema pallidum. Presentation:

1      Primary: <90d after innoculation (median 3wk). Maculepapuletypically pain-

less ulcer (chancre). Central slough, deﬁ ned rolled edge. Highly infectious.

2      Secondary: dissemination ~4–10wks after chancre. Rash (maculopapular in 50–
75%, on palms/soles in 11–70%), mucous patches, condyloma lata (raised, pale 
plaques, often ﬂ exural), fever, headache, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis.
3      Tertiary: 20–40yr  after  infection.  Neurosyphilis:  aseptic  meningitis,  focal  neu-
rological deﬁ cits, seizures, psychiatric symptoms, Argyll Robertson pupil (p72), 
tabes dorsalis (areﬂ exia, extensor plantar reﬂ ex, dorsal column deﬁ cits, Char-
cot joints). Gummatous syphilis: destructive granulomata in skin, mucus mem-
branes, bones, viscera. Cardiovascular: aortitis, aortic regurgitation/aneurysm.
Diagnosis: PCR. Serology: non-speciﬁ c (RPR, VDRL) sensitive in early infection then de-
cline; speciﬁ c (T. pallidum as antigen, eg TPHA, TPPA) reacts in early infection and per-
sists. Treatment: parenteral benzylpenicillin (eg benzathine penicillin IM), duration 
depends on stage. Procaine benzylpenicillin boosted with probenicid in CSF disease.
  • Lymphogranuloma venerum: Chlamydia trachomatis. Presentation: mostly MSM 
in UK. Painless papule/ulcerlymphadenopathy, fever, arthritis, pneumonitis. Direct 
transmission to rectal mucosa causes haemorrhagic proctitis: pain, rectal bleed-
ing/discharge, tenesmus. Diagnosis: PCR. Treatment: doxycycline.

  • Tropical  infections:  Chancroid  (Haemophilus  ducreyi),  Donovanosis  (Klebsiella 
granulomatis).  Presentation:  both  cause  genital  ulceration,  and  lymphadenitis 
with spread of infection into overlying tissue (pseudobubo). Diagnosis: H. ducreyi 
PCR, Donovan bodies in tissue. Treatment: azithromycin, ceftriaxone.

_OHCM_10e.indb   412

_OHCM_10e.indb   412

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

4

4

1

1

3

3

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

7

7

Table 9.16  Overview of urethritis and vaginal discharge

STI
Chlamydia 
trachomatis

Presentation
Often  asymptomatic:  detected  on 
screening.
: dyspareunia, dysuria, post-coital/
inter-menstrual  bleeding,  vaginal 
discharge.
: dysuria, urethral discharge.

Diagnosis
Nucleic acid ampliﬁ cation test (NAAT) on:
:  vulvovaginal  swab—can  be  done  by 
patient.  Endocervical  swabs  and  urine 
samples less sensitive.
: ﬁ rst-pass urine.
Oral/anal swabs if oral/anal sex.

Treatment
Azithromycin 1g PO (single dose)
or
100mg doxycycline BD for 7d.
Partner tracing, screening, treatment.
Avoid  sexual  intercourse  until  treat-
ment complete. 

Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae

Urethral/vaginal discharge, dysuria.
Asymptomatic: 50% , 10% , most 
pharyngeal/rectal infection.

Non-
gonococcal
urethritis 
(NGU)
Tricho-
monas 
vaginalis

Urethral discharge, dysuria, urethral 
discomfort.  Only  assess  sympto-
matic  patients/visible  discharge  for 
urethritis.
: vaginal discharge (~70%), itch.
: asymptomatic (~70%), discharge.

(endocervical/urethral  swab 

Nucleic acid ampliﬁ cation test (NAAT) on:
:  vaginal  swab  or  endocervical  swab. 
Urine samples less sensitive.
: ﬁ rst-pass urine.
Culture 
prior to antibiotics) for sensitivity. 
Polymorphonuclear 
on 
leucocytes 
microscopy  of  urethral  swab.  Needs 
testing  for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhoea. 
Exclude UTI. 
NAAT, culture, microscopy (mobile trich-
omonads).

Bacterial 
vaginosis

Genital
candidiasis

Thin,  white,  ﬁ shy-smelling  vaginal 
discharge. No itch or soreness.
Asymptomatic in ~50%. 
Genital itch, burning, cottage cheese-
like discharge, dyspareunia.

Gram  stain  to  examine  vaginal  ﬂ ora 
(predominance/absence  of  lactobacilli), 
clue cells, vaginal pH >4.5.
Microscopy  and  culture  for  Candida 
(see p408).

disease: 

Ceftriaxone  500mg  IM + azithromycin
1g PO.  Complicated 
add
doxycycline ± metronidazole.
Partner tracing, screening, treatment.
Avoid  sexual  intercourse  until  treat-
ment complete.
As for Chlamydia trachomatis.
5d  course  of  azithromycin  if  patient/
partner known to be positive for
Mycoplasma genitalium. 
Metronidazole  (2g  single  dose  or  5–7d 
course).  Partner  tracing,  screening, 
treatment.  Avoid  sexual  intercourse 
until treatment complete.
Oral or PV metronidazole
or
PV clindamycin.
-azoles: pessary, eg clotrimazole, cream 
if  vulval  symptoms,  oral  ﬂ uconazole  if 
severe. 

Other 
Pharyngeal and rectal infection may be asymp-
tomatic. Complications:
: pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease, salpingitis, in-
fertility,  ectopic  pregnancy,  reactive  arthritis, 
perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome).
: epididymo-orchitis, reactive arthritis.
Eye disease see p438.
Antibiotic resistance. Complications:
: pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease: salpingitis, in-
fertility, ectopic pregnancy.
:  epididymitis,  prostatitis, 
increased  HIV 
transmission,  reactive  arthritis;  infective  en-
docarditis, disseminated gonococcal infection.
NGU  refers  to  a  pattern  of  infection  rather 
than a cause. The main causes are Chlamydia 
trachomatis (11–50%) and Mycoplasma geni-
talium (6–50%).
Pregnancy: risk of preterm delivery, low birth 
weight.
May enhance HIV transmission. 

Elevated  vaginal  pH  alters  vaginal  ﬂ ora: 
anaerobic bacteria. Not sexually transmitted 
but associated with STI.
Very  common.  No  evidence  for  treatment  of 
sexual  partners.  Risk:  pregnant,  antibiotic 
therapy, DM, immunosuppressed. 

Infectious diseases

4
1
3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
414

Fever in the returning traveller

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

 Exclude malaria in all travellers from the tropics (p416–9).
 Exclude HIV in all (p398).
 Most travellers have self-limiting illnesses that could have been acquired in UK. 
Look for tropical infection9 but don’t forget your usual diff erentials.
History Detailed geography of travel (table 9.17)9 including setting (rural/urban), 
time of onset of symptoms, duration of symptoms (table 9.18).9 Ask about activities 
and events: bites, diet, fresh-water exposure (schistosomiasis, leptospirosis), dust 
exposure, sexual activity, game parks (tick typhus, anthrax, trypanosomiasis), farms, 
caves (histoplasmosis, rabies, Ebola), unwell contacts.
Associated symptoms:
  • Respiratory: S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, legionella, inﬂ uenza, viral respiratory 

disease (SARS, MERS), TB, HIV-associated disease, melioidosis.2

  • Neurological: malaria, meningococcal meningitis, HIV, syphilis, Lyme disease, lep-
tospirosis, brucellosis, tick-borne encephalitis, relapsing fever, trypanosomiasis.

Table 9.17  Diff erential diagnosis by geography
Area of travel Common
Sub-Saharan 
Africa

Malaria (pp416–9)
HIV (pp398–403)
Rickettsiae (p422)

South-East 
Asia

Malaria (pp416–9)
Chikungunya (p420)
Dengue (p420)
Enteric fever (p415)

Occasional
Schistosomiasis (p434)
Amoebiasis (p432)
Brucellosis (p424)
Dengue (p420)
Enteric fever (p415)
Meningococcus (p390)
Leptospirosis (p425)
Melioidosis2

South and 
Central Asia

Malaria (pp416–9)
Dengue (p420)
Enteric fever (p415)

Chikungunya (p420)
Visceral leishmaniasis 
(p423)

Malaria (pp416–9)
Dengue (p420)
Enteric fever (p415)

Brucellosis (p424)
Q-fever (p424)
Zika (p421)
Brucellosis (p424)
Leptospirosis (p425)
Zika (p421)
Lyme disease (p422)

Rare but do not miss 
Other arbovirus (p420)
Trypanosomiasis (p423)
VHF (pp426–7)
Visceral leishmaniasis 
(p423)

Hanta virus (p426)
Japanese encephalitis 
(p436)
Rickettsiae (p422)
Scrub typhus (p422)
VHF (CCHF) (pp426–7)
Rickettsiae (p422)
Japanese encephalitis 
(p436)
Visceral leishmaniasis 
(p423)

Trypansomiasis (p423)
Hanta virus (p426)
Yellow fever (p420)
Hanta virus (p426)
Tick-borne encephalitis

Middle East 
Mediterranean 
North Africa
South America
Caribbean

Eastern
Europe
Scandinavia
Australia

North America

Dengue (p420)
Q fever (p424)
Rickettsiae (p422)
Lyme disease (p422)
Rickettsiae (p422) 

Melioidosis2

Melioidosis2

Table 9.18  Diff erential diagnosis according to incubation time
Incubation period Infections
Short <10d
Medium 10–21d

Long >21d

Chronic fever <14d

Dengue, chikungunya, gastroenteritis, relapsing fever, rickettsiae
Malaria, HIV, brucellosis, enteric fever, leptospirosis, melioidosis, 
Q-fever, coccidioidomycosis, VHF, Chagas’ disease, trypanosomiasis
Malaria, HIV, TB, viral hepatitis, brucellosis, schistosomiasis, amoe-
bic liver abscess, trypanosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis
TB, HIV plus opportunistic infection, pyogenic deep seated abscess, 
infective endocarditis, brucellosis, enteric fever, fungal infection, 
schistosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis, PE

2  Burkholderia  pseudomallei  in  tropical  water/soil.  Causes  pneumonia,  pleural  eff usions,  pulmonary 
abscess. Systemic abscess if haematogenous spread: liver, spleen, skin, muscle. Treat with co-amoxiclav, 
doxycycline, co-trimoxazole. In severe disease: ceftazidime, meropenem.

_OHCM_10e.indb   414

_OHCM_10e.indb   414

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
415

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Examination
Rash:
  • Maculopapular: dengue, chikungunya, EBV, HIV seroconversion, VHF.
  • Purpuric: dengue, meningococcal infection, plague, DIC, VHF.
  • Ulcer: trypanosomiasis, Yesinia pestis, tick typhus, anthrax, tropical ulcer.
Jaundice: Viral hepatitis, severe falciparum malaria, enteric fever, leptospirosis, re-
lapsing fever, typhus, VHF, bartonellosis
Hepatosplenomegaly: Viral hepatitis,  HIV, enteric fever, brucellosis, leptospirosis, 
rickettsial infection, relapsing fever, schistosomiasis, amoebic liver abscess, trypa-
nosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis.
Investigation
Directed by travel history and examination. In undiff erentiated fever:
  • Malaria ﬁ lm/rapid diagnostic testing (p417).
  • HIV test (p399).
  • FBC: lymphopenia in viral infection including HIV; eosinophilia in parasitic/fungal eg 
soil-transmitted helminths, ﬁ liariasis, schistosomiasis, hydatid disease; platelets 
in malaria, dengue, HIV, typhoid, severe sepsis.

  • Blood culture ≈2: prior to antibiotics.
  • LFT.
  • Consider: save serum, speciﬁ c serology, or EDTA sample for PCR.
Support
  • Local infectious diseases team (including on-call).
  • Disease notiﬁ cation: www.gov.uk/health-protection-team.
  • Public Health England imported fever service 0844 778 8990.
  • National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC)/TravelHealthPro

www.travelhealthpro.org.uk (0845 602 6712).
  • Hospital for Tropical Diseases 0203 456 7890.
  • Travel fever diagnostic website: www.fevertravel.ch

Enteric fever: typhoid and paratyphoid
~20 million cases and 200 000 deaths per year worldwide, ~500/yr in UK mostly im-
ported from India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. Caused by related, Gram-negative 
strains of ‘typhoidal’ Salmonella spp:
  • Typhoid (~75–90%): Salmonella typhi.
  • Paratyphoid (~10–25%, less severe): Salmonella paratyphi serotype A>B>C.
The bacteria invade the intestinal mucosa. Dissemination occurs without a pri-
mary diarrhoeal response. This distinguishes ‘typhoidal’ from ‘non-typhoidal’ se-
rovars of Salmonella which cause  D&V (p428). Transmission is faecal–oral from 
contaminated water/food. Incubation 6–30d (most 10–20d). ~10 000 organisms are 
required to cause illness. Can be asymptomatic (but shed organism).
Symptoms: Fatigue, headache, anorexia. Marked fever, ‘stepwise’ (rising through 
each day with progressive peaks) in <20%. Abdominal pain, relative bradycardia 
(Faget’s sign), cough, constipation. Rose spots in ~25% (salmon-coloured, 1–4cm, 
blanching, due to bacterial emboli to dermis). Diarrhoea (‘pea-soup’) and hepato-
splenomegaly in 2nd week. Progressive toxicity and complicated disease in up to 
10%: intestinal haemorrhage/perforation, myocarditis, hepatitis, pneumonia, DIC, 
CNS involvement (delirium, meningism, encephalitis, cerebellar signs, ﬁ ts, coma), 
eye complications (corneal ulcer, uveitis, neuritis, thrombosis).
Diagnosis: Isolation of S. typhi from: blood (take multiple cultures of 10–15mL in 
ﬁ rst 10d to  sensitivity), bone marrow, intestinal secretions, or stool (sensitivity 
after 1st week). Serology has  sensitivity and speciﬁ city, not suffi  cient as sole 
diagnostic tool (Widal test is Ωve in ~30% of culture-proven cases). LFT. PCR (not 
routine).
Treatment: Azithromycin ± IV ceftriaxone. >70% imported from Asia are resistant 
to ﬂ uoroquinolones. Fever takes median 5–7d to respond due to intracellular niche 
of organism. Antipyretics, ﬂ uid management, nutrition. CNS disease: dexametha-
sone 3mg/kg IV then 1mg/kg/6h for 8 doses (limited data).
Vaccine: Ty21a (oral, live, CI: immunosuppression, pregnancy) or Vi (IM, capsular 
vaccine). ~50–80% eff ective for ~3yr. Limited/no protection against paratyphoid.

_OHCM_10e.indb   415

_OHCM_10e.indb   415

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
416

Malaria: diagnosis

Epidemiology
  • 3.2 billion people at risk in 95 countries = half the world’s population (ﬁ g 9.23).
  • 214 million/cases per year with 438 000 deaths.
  • Sub-Saharan Africa: 88% of malaria cases, 90% of deaths (most age <5yr).
  • Most common tropical disease imported into UK, ~2000 cases/yr.
  • ~20% fever in travellers from Africa presenting to UK hospitals is due to malaria.
  • Plasmodium falciparum is the most prevalent parasite in Africa and responsible 

for most malaria deaths worldwide (=~75% of malaria presenting in UK).
  • Plasmodium vivax is the dominant parasite outside of sub-Saharan Africa.
  • Preventable and treatable: incidence  by 37% and deaths  by 60% since 2000.
Malaria parasites
Malaria parasites belong to the genus Plasmodium. >100 species exist of which 5 
cause human disease (see table 9.19). Transmission occurs through the bite of an 
infected Anopheles mosquito. Only female mosquitoes transmit Plasmodium as only 
females require a blood meal for egg development. Transmission in the absence of 
a mosquito is rare: vertical (congenital transfer from mother to child), transfusion, 
organ transplantation, needle-sharing.

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.23  Countries with malaria transmission.
Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, World malaria report 2015. © World Health 
Organization 2015. http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/world-malaria-report-2015/report/en/

Table 9.19  Malaria species in humans

Average incuba-
tion (range)
12 days
(6 days–6 months)
14 days
(days–years)
30 days
(28 days–years)
11–16 days (years) Yes
9–12 days
No

Yes

No

Species

P. falciparum 
(ﬁ g 9.24)

Persistent 
liver stage
No

Distribution

Africa, India, South East Asia, Indonesia, 
Oceania, Central America, Middle East

P. vivax
(ﬁ g 9.25)
P. malariae 
(ﬁ g 9.26)
P. ovale
P. knowlesi
Reproduced from Detels et al., Oxford Textbook of Global Public Health, 2015, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

South Asia, South and Central America, 
Africa, Middle East
Africa,  South  and  Central  America, 
South East Asia
Africa
South East Asia

Fig 9.24  P. falciparum 
sau sage-like gam eto cytes 
in RBC.

© S Upton, Kansas Univ.

Fig 9.25  P.  vivax  ring  partly 
hidden by Schuff ner’s dots.

Stained and examined in the 
ﬁ eld by JML.

Fig 9.26  P. malariae ring and 
band forms from 2 specimens.

© S Upton, Kansas Univ.

_OHCM_10e.indb   416

_OHCM_10e.indb   416

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
417

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

1st vector

2nd vector

Blood
infection

Liver
infection

Initial
human
host

Next human
host

Plasmodium
sporozoites

In utero
transmission

The  life  cycle  of  malaria  is  de-
pendent  on  both  humans  and 
mosquitoes  (ﬁ g  9.27).  Sporozo-
ites are transferred to a human 
host when an infected mosquito 
bites. These travel via the blood-
stream to the liver where matu-
ration  occurs  to  form  schizonts 
containing  ~30 000  merozoite 
off spring.  If  a  dormant  stage 
exists  (vivax,  ovale,  see  table 
9.19),  and  is  inadequately  treat-
ed,  merozoites  can  be  released 
from  the  liver  weeks,  months, 
or years later causing recurrent 
disease. The rupture of schizonts 
releases  merozoites  which  enter 
RBCs (‘what a fantastic niche!’). In the RBC, merozoites form larger trophozoites and 
erthrocytic schizonts (poor prognostic indicator if seen on blood ﬁ lm). The rupture of 
erthrocytic schizonts produces the clinical manifestations of malaria.
Clinical features
Consider in anyone with a fever who has previously visited a malarial area (ﬁ g 9.23), 
regardless of prophylaxis.
Presentation: P. falciparum has a minimum incubation of 6 days and most com-
monly occurs within 3 months of return from an endemic area. Take a careful travel 
history: country, area of travel, date of return. Do not forget to ask about stopovers.
Symptoms are non-speciﬁ c: fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, diarrhoea, cough. Fe-
ver patterns are described but only occur if rupture of infected RBCs is synchronized: 
alternate day for P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale (‘tertian’); every 3rd day for P. 
malariae (‘quartan’). Most patients have no speciﬁ c fever pattern.
Examination: Fever, otherwise unremarkable. If diagnosis is delayed or severe dis-
ease then may present with jaundice, confusion, seizures.
Diagnosis
Immediate blood testing is mandatory in UK:
  • Microscopy of thick and thin blood smear. Sensitive and speciﬁ c in experienced 

Fig 9.27  Malaria lifecycle.

hands.

  • Rapid diagnostic test (RDT) detection of parasite antigen. Used for initial screen if 
expert microscopy is unavailable, eg out-of-hours. Used in addition to (not instead 
of) blood ﬁ lm.

Results should be available within 4h. If malaria is suspected but blood ﬁ lm is nega-
tive: repeat at 12–24h and after further 24h. Malaria is unlikely if three expert serial 
blood ﬁ lms are negative.  dengue, typhoid, hepatitis, meningitis/encephalitis, HIV, 
viral  haemorrhagic  fever.  Care  in  pregnancy:  thick  ﬁ lms  can  be  negative  despite 
parasites in the placenta. Seek expert help.
If P. falciparum (or P. knowlesi) estimated % parasitized red cells should be given:
  • >2% =  chance of severe disease (indication for parenteral treatment see pp418–9).
  • >10% = severe disease.
Other: FBC (anaemia, thrombocytopenia), creatinine and urine output (AKI), clotting 
(DIC), glucose (hypoglycaemia), ABG/lactate (acidosis), urinalysis (haemoglobinuria).
Malaria is notiﬁ able to public health: www.gov.uk/health-protection-team
Errors to avoid 

 • Delay in blood ﬁ lm/RDT
 • Failure to consider diagnosis
 • No serial blood ﬁ lm if ﬁ rst test negative
 • Inadequate travel history
 • Inadequate treatment (pp418–9)
 • Belief prophylaxis prevents all malaria
 • Inappropriate treatment (pp418–9)
 • Belief presents with a fever pattern
 • Failure to anticipate/treat complications.
 • Non-speciﬁ c symptoms not recognized
Reproduced from Beeching et al., Returned travellers. In: Principles and Practice of Travel Medicine, 
2013, John Wiley and Sons. Copyright © 2013 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

_OHCM_10e.indb   417

_OHCM_10e.indb   417

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
418

Malaria: treatment

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Falciparum malaria
Risk of deterioration  admit to hospital. Treatment10 depends upon whether the 
disease is uncomplicated, or severe. Features of severe disease are:
  • Impaired consciousness/seizures (consider LP)
  • AKI (oliguria <0.4mL/kg/h, creatinine>265μmol/L)
  • Shock (BP <90/60) = ‘Algid malaria’
  • Hypoglycaemia (<2.2mmol/L)
  • Pulmonary oedema/ARDS
Remember other poor prognostic indicators: peripheral blood schizonts (see p417), 
elevated serum lactate, age.
Uncomplicated falciparum malaria:
Artemisinin  combination  therapies  (ACT)  achieve  rapid  clearance  of  parasites  by 
combined action at diff erent stages of the parasite cycle (p417):

  • Hb <80g/L
  • Spontaneous bleeding/DIC
  • Acidosis (pH <7.3)
  • Haemoglobinuria
  • Parasitaemia >10%.

1      Artemether-lumefantrine: 4 tablets at 0, 4, 8, 24, 36, 48, and 60h.

1st line in UK (including pregnant >13wks), take with high-fat food to  absorption.

2      Dihydroartemisinin (DHA)-piperaquine: 4 tablets OD for 3d (if weight >60kg).

Take >3h before and after food to prevent excessive peak levels. Possible QTC  
avoid in arrhythmia.
Options if ACT not available:
  • Atovaquone-proguanil: 4 tablets OD for 3 days. Parasite clearance ~66% after 3d, 

GI side-eff ects in ~25%.

  • Oral quinine sulphate 600mg TDS for 5–7d plus doxycycline 200mg OD (or clinda-
mycin 450mg TDS if pregnant) for 7d. Parasite monitoring required. Can cause ‘cin-
chonism’: nausea, deafness, ringing in ears.

Resistance to ACT is emerging in Asia.
Failure rates with antifolate drugs mean Fansidar® is no longer used.
Chloroquine is not used in the treatment of falciparum malaria.

Severe P. falciparum malaria
Give  urgent  parenteral  treatment.  Artesunate  is  treatment  of  choice. 
Meta-analysis  shows  reduction  in  mortality  of  39%  (CI:  25–50%)  compared  to 
quinine,  preventing  94  deaths  for  every  1000  adults  treated.11  IV  artesunate  is 
stocked  by  many  infectious  disease  units  in  the  UK.  It  can  be  obtained  from 
tropical disease centres in London (020 3456 7890) and Liverpool (0151 706 2000).
Artesunate regimen (adult): 2.4mg/kg IV at 0h, 12h, 24h and then daily for up 
to 5d. Converted to a full course of ACT (see uncomplicated falciparum earlier in 
topic)  when  able  to  tolerate  oral  medication.  Side-eff ects:  delayed  haemolysis 
7–21d post-treatment (usually self-limiting)—check Hb 14d post treatment.
If  artesunate  is  not  available  immediately,  treatment  should  be  started  with 
quinine. It is safe to overlap/combine with artensuate when it is available.
Quinine  regimen  (adult): Loading dose  20mg/kg over 4h. Then 10mg/kg every 
8h for next 48h or until patient can swallow (dose every 12h if patient has renal 
failure or hepatic dysfunction or if IV needed >48h). Convert to 600mg PO TDS to 
total quinine course 5–7d. Give with 7d oral doxycycline (clarithromycin in children/
pregnant). Side-eff ects: cinchonism (see earlier in topic), hyperinsulinaemia.
Manage in a high dependency setting. Capillary permeability so vulnerable to pul-
monary  oedema  if  over-ﬁ lled.  Lactate  levels  may  reﬂ ect  intravascular  obstruction 
rather than circulating hypovolaemia. Monitor: blood glucose every 4h (2h if quinine 
infusion), Hb, clotting, electrolytes, creatinine. Daily parasite counts are suffi  cient NB: 
will ﬂ uctuate with the life cycle of the parasite (see p417) and an increase in ﬁ rst 36h 
of treatment may not indicate treatment failure. Given the rapid action of artesu-
nate, exchange transfusion is no longer considered to off er any additional beneﬁ t.
Pregnancy: Little evidence on use/safety of artesunate. On balance of risk (preg-
nancy loss, pulmonary oedema, maternal mortality), artesunate should be given.

_OHCM_10e.indb   418

_OHCM_10e.indb   418

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Non-falciparum malaria 
P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi:
  • If mixed infection with falciparum, treat as falciparum.
  • If severe/complicated non-falciparum disease, treat as severe falciparum.
  • If uncomplicated disease, treat with ACT as uncomplicated falciparum.
Chloroquine can be used for non-falciparum disease. Dosing in adult: 620mg base at 
0h, 310mg base at 6–8h, 310mg base on day 2 and 3. But:
  • do not use if P. falciparum cannot be excluded
  • be aware that ACT may work more quickly on both fever and parasite count
  • chloroquine resistance exists in P. vivax (Papua New Guinea, Indonesia).
In addition to other treatment, P. vivax and P. ovale require eradication of liver 
hypnozoites with primaquine:
  • P. vivax: adult 30mg (0.5mg/kg) daily for 14d.
  • P. ovale: adult 15mg (0.25mg/kg) daily for 14d.
Risk of haemolysis with primaquine in G6PD deﬁ ciency so screen prior to use. Seek 
expert advice for dosing/monitoring patients with G6PD deﬁ ciency, and in pregnancy. 

419

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Malaria prevention
Vector control for all people at risk of malaria. Includes:
  • Source reduction by destruction of mosquito breeding sites (ie standing water).
  • Long-lasting insecticidal nets. These should be provided free of charge and with 
equity of access. Nets last for ~3y, a lifespan of 5y could save ~$3.8bn. Insecticidal 
resistance is an increasing concern, should dual agents be used?

  • Indoor residual spraying, eff ective for 3–6 months when >80% of houses included.
  • Sterile male mosquito release. Estimated to initially require 20 males/human to 

be protected  ~64 billion sterile mosquitoes worldwide.

  • Genetic modiﬁ cation to develop mosquitoes that are not susceptible to malaria 
(and other) parasites. Requires modiﬁ cation that does not  fertility or will not 
disperse in vector population. Requires acceptability, infrastructure, and money.
Chemoprophylaxis is the use of antimalarial drugs to prevent clinical disease. In 
high-transmission areas it is recommended for pregnant women (given at antena-
tal visits) and infants (given with routine vaccination).
Travellers from the UK to malaria areas should be given:

1      Bite prevention advice: insect repellents with 20–50% DEET (for all >2 months 
old including pregnant and breast-feeding). Apply after sunscreen with SPF 
>30 as DEET may  sunscreen effi  cacy.

2      Chemoprophylaxis (table 9.20) according to area of travel. See www.ﬁ tfortravel.

nhs.uk/destinations.aspx

Table 9.20  Prophylactic regimen against malaria in adults (refer to BNF)

Area
No drug
resistance
Little
chloroquine
resistance
Chloroquine-
resistant
P. falciparum

Regimen 
Chloroquine 310mg base/week
OR proguanil 200mg OD
Chloroquine  310mg  base/week 
PLUS proguanil 200mg OD

Meﬂ oquine 250mg/week
OR
Doxyxcycline 100mg OD OR

Atovaquone-proguanil  combi-
nation 

Notes
1wk before and 4wks after travel.
Chloroquine:  GI  disturbance,  head-
ache. CI epilepsy.
Proguanil:  diarrhoea,  antifolate  (care 
if possibility of pregnancy). 

2–3wks  prior  and  4wks  after.  Neu-
ropsychiatric SE, dizziness. 
1–2d prior, 4wks after, SE: hepatic im-
pairment, teratogenic.
1–2d  prior,  1wk  after,  expert  advice 
with HIV ART.

Malaria  eradication  is  the  permanent  reduction  of  the  incidence  of  malaria 
meaning that intervention is no longer required. It is dependent upon the social, 
demographic, and economic status of a country, the available healthcare system, 
and investment. It requires diagnosis and treatment to achieve parasitologic (as 
opposed to clinical) cure in order to eliminate asymptomatic transmission.

_OHCM_10e.indb   419

_OHCM_10e.indb   419

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
420

Mosquito-borne disease

Mosquito-borne diseases12 are transmitted by the bite of a mosquito infected with 
a virus, bacteria, or parasite. The mosquito acts as the disease vector. Mosquitoes 
are arthropods (see table 9.21). Mosquito-borne diseases can therefore also be de-
scribed as vector-borne or arthropod-borne disease. When a virus is transmitted by 
an arthropod it is termed an arbovirus (ARthropod-BOrne VIRUS).
Malaria See pp416–9.
Dengue
Most  important  arbovirus  in  humans.  Dengue  viruses  (Flaviviruses  DENV 1–4)  are 
transmitted by day-biting Aedes mosquito. 120 countries (ﬁ g 9.28). Symptoms in 100 
million/yr. UK: ~500 imported cases/yr.

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.28  Countries at risk of dengue (dotted line = 10°C isotherm).

Reproduced from Johnson et al., Oxford Handbook of Expedition and Wilderness Medicine, 2016, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

Presentation:  Incubation  3–14d.  Fever  (up  to  40°C),  N&V,  headache,  retro-orbital 
pain, myalgia, arthralgia, +ve tourniquet test (inﬂ ate BP cuff  to midway between sys-
tolic and diastolic for 5 min≥10 petechiae/inch2). Warning signs/critical phase 
may occur 3–7d into illness and needs hospital admission: abdominal pain, persistent 
vomiting, ﬂ uid accumulation, mucosal bleeding, hepatomegaly, haematocrit + plt. 
Severe disease: shock (includes postural BP drop >20mmHg), respiratory distress, 
severe bleeding, organ involvement (transaminases >1000, GCS, other organ failure). 
Diagnosis: PCR for virus/ELISA antigen3 during viraemia (~1st 5d of fever). Serology 
(IgM, IgG) after 5d. Also plt, WCC, transaminitis. (: Chikungunya, Zika.) Treatment: 
Supportive: prompt but careful ﬂ uid balance due to potential for plasma leak.  IV 
crystalloid, to maintain eff ective circulation, only in severe disease. 20mL/kg over 
15–30min  if  hypotensive  shock.  Monitor  clinically  and  via  haematocrit.  Reduce  IV 
ﬂ uid as soon as stable. Beware: plasma leak maintains haemocrit unless bleeding. 
Consider transfusion if haematocrit without clinical improvement. Avoid NSAIDs.
Chikungunya
Arbovirus (Alphavirus) transmitted by Aedes mosquito. Widespread: Asia, Africa, 
Europe, and Americas. Name derives from Kimakonde language meaning ‘to become 
contorted’  due  to  arthralgia.  Blood-borne  and  vertical  transmission  possible,  but 
rare. Presentation: Incubation 1–12d. Fever. Polyarthralgia: bilateral, symmetrical, 
can be severe, persistent. Headache, myalgia, N&V, maculopapular rash. Diagnosis:3 
Viral culture/PCR (~1st 8d), serology. Treatment: Supportive. Analgesia.
Yellow fever
Arbovirus (Flavivirus) spread by Aedes mosquitoes in Africa, South America. Pres-
entation: Incubation ~3–6d. Viraemia ~3d with fever, headache, myalgia, anorexia, 
N&V,  relative  bradycardia  (:  enteric  fever  p415).  ~15%  have  remission  followed 
by  severe  symptoms  ~48h  later:  epigastric  pain,  jaundice,  AKI,  cardiac  instability, 
bleeding. Mortality 5%-30%. Diagnosis: Clinical and travel history. Virus/PCR in 1st 
3d.3 Serology: cross reacts with other ﬂ aviviruses, IgM can persist after vaccination. 
Treatment: Supportive. Live vaccine, eff ective for life (certiﬁ cate for 10yr).
West Nile and Japanese encephalitis, see Neurological disease pp436–7. 

3  In UK testing done via Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory (RIPL): www.gov.uk/government/collec-
tions/rare-and-imported-pathogens-laboratory-ripl

_OHCM_10e.indb   420

_OHCM_10e.indb   420

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
421

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Zika virus
Arbovirius (Flavivirus) transmitted by Aedes mosquito. First identiﬁ ed in Zika for-
est, Uganda, 1947. Human cases rare until outbreak in Paciﬁ c Islands (2007–2013), 
and Brazil (2015). Estimated 1.5 million cases in Brazil by 2016. Zika detected in 
sperm and blood products so transmission not limited to vector. Up-to-date geo-
graphic and clinical data available at: www.ecdc.europa.eu Presentation: Subclinical 
in ~80%. Mild illness in ~20%: fever, conjunctivitis, myalgia, rash. Severe acute 
illness and Guillian–Barré are rare. Zika and birth defects: Geographical and tem-
poral relationship between infection and microcephaly. Zika detected in amniotic 
ﬂ uid is evidence of placental transfer. Speciﬁ c fetal syndrome: microcephaly, in-
tracranial calciﬁ cation, eye pathology, redundant scalp skin. Small, uncontrolled 
studies show fetal abnormalities in up to 30% of pregnant women infected with 
Zika.13 Absolute and relative risks unknown (2016). Diagnosis: PCR of viral DNA in 
blood/body ﬂ uid. Treatment: Vector control, avoid non-essential travel in preg-
nancy, condoms to prevent sexual transmission. Vaccine trials ongoing (2016).

Lymphatic ﬁ lariasis (elephantiasis)
>40 million aff ected and disﬁ gured. >1 billion at risk (80% in 
sub-Saharan Africa). Filarial parasites (nematodes) trans-
mitted via mosquitoes which bite infected hosts and ingest 
microﬁ laria. These mature in the mosquito with infective 
larvae  transferring  to  new  hosts  during  feeding.  Adult 
worms form nests in lymphatic vessels causing damage and 
lymphoedema. Transmission prevented by an annual dose 
of two drugs—5.63 billion treatments delivered by WHO since 
2000.12 Types of ﬁ larial worm:
  • Wuchereria bancrofti (ﬁ g 9.29) ~90% of disease.
  • Brugia malaya ~10%.
  • Brugia timori possible cause of disease.
Presentation:  Asymptomatic  infection  ±  subclinical  lym-
phatic damage. Acute episodes of local inﬂ ammation: pain, 
fever. Chronic damage: lymphoedema (ﬁ g 9.30), hydrocele, 
chylocele,  scrotal/penile  swelling.  CKD:  proteinuria,  haema-
turia.  Immune  hyper reactivity  tropical  pulmonary  eo-
sinophilia (cough, wheeze, ﬁ brosis, eosinophil counts, IgE). 
Diagnosis: Microﬁ lariae in blood smear (ﬁ g 9.29), antiﬁ larial 
IgG, visualization of worms on USS/tissue sample. Treatment: 
Lymphoedema care. Prevention in high-risk populations: al-
bendazole plus either diethylcarbamazine (DEC) or ivermec-
tin. DEC is contraindicated in onchocerciasis (p439), care with 
circulating Loa Loa (p439) due to risk of encephalopathy and 
renal failure. Household salt can be fortiﬁ ed with DEC.

Fig 9.29  Blood smear of 
W. bancrofti (290≈8.5μm).
Courtesy of Prof. S. Upton, 
Kansas University.

Fig 9.30  Lymphoedema.
Reproduced with permis-
sion from World Health 
Organization. © World 
Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/lymphatic_
ﬁ lariasis/disease/en/ 

The global advance of vector-borne disease?
Since 1990, ﬁ ve species of Aedes mosquito have become established in Europe. 
The  adaptation  of  mosquitoes  to  a  temperate  environment,  combined  with  fu-
ture climate forecasts has led to models14 that predict the UK will be suitable for:
  • Plasmodium falciparum transmission by 2030–2080
  • Plasmodium vivax transmission by 2030
  • Chikungunya transmission in London by 2041
  • Dengue transmission after 2100.
Of  course,  modelling  is  not  simple.  Socioeconomic  development,  urbanization, 
land-use change, migration, and globalization all come into play. Surveillance of 
mosquitoes at sea-ports, airports, and used-tyre companies remains uninteresting 
to date. But consider a time when a visit to South-East England off ers an oppor-
tunity to explore the historical gems of our wonderful capital, and simultaneously 
becomes a pertinent question in your diagnostic sieve....

_OHCM_10e.indb   421

_OHCM_10e.indb   421

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
422

Vector-borne disease

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Page
416–9
420–1
421,436–7
422–3, 
426–7
423, 439
434

Vector borne diseases are infections transmitted by the bite of infected arthropod 
species including mosquitoes, ticks, ﬂ ies, and bugs (table 9.21).
Table 9.21  Vector-borne disease
Vector/arthropod
Disease
Mosquito Anopheles Malaria

Aedes
Culex

Ticks

Dengue, Chikungunya, yellow fever, Zika 
Lymphatic ﬁ lariasis, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile
Lyme disease, rickettsial disease, relapsing fever, tick-
borne encephalitis, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Leishmaniasis, trypanosomiasis, onchocerciasis, loiasis
Schistosomiasis

Bugs/Flies
Snails
Lyme disease  (Lyme borreliosis)
Tick-borne multisystem disease caused by the spirochaete Bor-
relia burgdorferi (or related Borrelia spp). ~All cases limited to 
northern hemisphere (mainly Europe and US). ~2000–3000 cases/
yr in UK. Risk of infection from tick bite is 3–12% in Europe. Pres-
entation: ≤75% remember the tick bite. Peak infection with 
48–72h of attachment. Disease stages:
  • Early localized (3–30d after bite): erythema migrans (ﬁ g 9.31), 
pain/pruritus,  lymphadenopathy,  ±  constitutional  symptoms: 
fever, malaise, headache. ⅓ do not see a rash.

  • Early  disseminated  (wks–months):  borrelial  lymphocytoma 
= bluish-red plaque/nodule: check earlobes, nipples, genitals. 
Neuroborreliosis:  lymphocytic  meningitis,  ataxia,  amnesia, 
facial/cranial  nerve  palsies,  neuro pathy  (severe  pain,  worse 
at  night),  encephalomyelitis.  Carditis:  acute  onset  2nd/3rd-
degree heart-block, myocarditis.

Fig  9.31  Erythema 
migrans: distinct ad-
vancing edge.

Reproduced from 
Lewis-Jones, Paedi-
atric Dermatology 
2010, with permission 
from Oxford University 
Press.

  • Late disseminated (months–yr): acrodermatitis chronic atrophicans = focal inﬂ am-

mation then atrophic skin; Lyme arthritis.

Diagnosis: Clinical: erythema migrans with known exposure or evidence of infection. 
Borrelia culture (sensitivity: 40–70% for erythema migrans, <20% for CSF), PCR.4 Two-
tier serology due to false-positive reaction with other spirochaete infection: enzyme 
immunoassay/immunoﬂ uorescence + immunoblot. Sensitivity  due to slow serocon-
version: IgM 1–2wks (and may persist), IgG 4–6wks and background positivity 3–15%. 
Treatment: Erythema migrans: doxycycline 100mg BD PO for 10–21d (CI <8y, pregnant). 
Alternatives: amoxicillin, phenoxymethylpenicillin, azithromycin. Neuroborreliosis: cef-
triaxone or IV benzylpenicillin or doxycycline for 10–30d. Arthritis/carditis: doxycyline 
or amoxicillin or ceftriaxone for 14–30d.15 Prevention: Keep limbs covered; use insect re-
pellent (DEET); inspect skin and remove ticks (use tweezers, hold close to head/mouth).
Rickettsial disease
Rickettsiae are obligate, intracellular coccobacillary forms lying between bacteria 
and viruses. Mammals and arthropods are natural hosts. Risk with rural activities 
eg camping, hiking, hunting. Divided into:
  • Spotted fevers: eg Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Americas); rickettsialpox ( 

chicken-pox).

  • Typhus: scrub typhus in Asia-Paciﬁ c regions; endemic (ﬂ ea-borne) typhus in tropi-
cal areas; epidemic (louse-borne) typhus in homeless populations, eg refugees.

  • Other emerging illnesses: eg ehrlichia, anaplasma.
Presentation: Incubation ~1–2wks. Fever, headache, malaise, rash (maculopapular, 
vesicular or petechial), N&V, myalgia. Check for local lymphadenopathy and an eschar 
at the site of the bite (scrub typhus). Wide variation in severity depending on aeti-
ology. Fulminant, life-threatening infection possible with Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, louse-borne typhus, scrub typhus. Diagnosis: Clinical: fever + rash + travel to 
an endemic area. Serology, culture/PCR of blood/skin biopsy. Treatment: Antibiotics 
in severe cases: doxycycline, azithromycin, chloramphenicol.

4  Specialist diagnostic service and advice in UK via Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory (RIPL): www.
gov.uk/government/collections/rare-and-imported-pathogens-laboratory-ripl

_OHCM_10e.indb   422

_OHCM_10e.indb   422

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
423

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Leishmaniasis
Caused  by  protozoan  parasites  of  Leishmania12  species, 
transmitted by infected female phlebotomine sandﬂ ies. 556 
million at risk. Risk factors: poverty, malnutrition, displace-
ment, deforestation, dam building/irrigation. Presentation:
  • Cutaneous, most common form, ulceration (ﬁ g 9.56, p440).
  • Mucocutaneous  (ﬁ g  9.32):  leads  to  tissue  destruction  of 

nose, mouth, throat. 90% occurs in Bolivia, Brazil, Peru.

Fig 9.32  Mucocutane-
ous leishmaniasis.

cocutaneous_leishmaniasis/en/

Reproduced with permis-
sion from World Health 
Organization. © World 
Health Organization. http://
www.who.int/leishmaniasis/mu-

  • Visceral  leishmaniasis  (VL,  kala-azar,  ‘black  sickness’)  (ﬁ g 
9.33):  fever,  weight  loss,  hepatosplenomegaly,  anaemia. 
>95% mortality without treatment. Endemic in Indian sub-
continent, East Africa. 90% of new cases occur in Bangla-
desh,  Brazil,  Ethiopia,  India,  South  Sudan,  Sudan.  300 000 
cases/yr, 20 000 deaths/yr. Post kala-azar is a complication 
of Leishmania donovani = a hypopigmented macular/nodular 
rash ( leprosy), 6 months–1yr after apparent cure, can heal 
but is a reservoir for parasites and maintains transmission.
Diagnosis:  Clinical.  Microscopy  of  tissue  samples  (skin,  bone 
marrow) for parasite. Antibody detection in VL (indirect ﬂ uores-
cence, ELISA, western blot, direct agglutination test, or immuno-
chromatographic test) is limited due to: 1 Ab levels detectable 
for years after cure, cannot distinguish VL relapse/active infec-
tion. 2 Tests are +ve in many with no history of VL. 3 Serology 
may be Ωve if HIV +ve. Treatment: Liposomal amphoterin (single 
dose), oral miltefosine, pentavalent antimonials (resistance in 
India).  The  WHO Kala-azar  Elimination  Programme  (including 
donated liposomal amphotericin) has achieved a 75% reduction 
in new cases of VL.
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT, sleeping sickness)
Infection  with  Trypanosoma  protozoan  parasites16,  trans-
mitted by the tsetse ﬂ y in sub-Saharan Africa. Divided into:
  • Rhodesiense  HAT, incubation <21d, high fever,  GI disturbance, lymphadenopathy, 
headache. Chancre at bite site in ~84%, maculopapular rash. Progresses to myo-
pericarditis, arrhythmias, and neurological symptoms.

Reproduced with permis-
sion from World Health 
Organization. © World 
Health Organization. http://
www.who.int/leishmaniasis/

Fig 9.33  Visceral 
leishmaniasis.

visceral_leishmaniasis/en/

  • Gambiense HAT, chronic disease in African population, presents years after infec-
tion (can present with acute febrile illness in travellers). Low-grade fever. Sleep 
disorder: reversal of sleep–wake cycle, uncontrollable sleep episodes. Weakness, 
abnormal gait, psychiatric symptoms.

Diagnosis:  Hb,  plt,  AKI,  LFTs,  polyclonal  IgM.  Microscopy  of  parasite  (blood, 
lymph node, chancre, CSF). Serology and PCR if available. Treatment: According to 
disease type and stage. Available from WHO. Includes suramin, melarsoprol, pentami-
dine, nifurtimox-eﬂ ornithine. Seek specialist advice—side-eff ects from all.
Chagas’ disease (American trypanosomiasis)
Life-threatening illness due to protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi transmitted by triatomine 
bugs. Endemic in Latin America: ~6–7 million infected. Presentation: Acute phase (~2 
months): skin lesion (chagoma), fever, headache, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, unilateral 
conjunct ivitis, periorbital oedema (Rom aña’s sign), myocard itis, meningo encephalitis. 
Chronic phase (yrs): cardiac: dilated cardiomyopathy;  GI: mega -oesophagus (dysph-
agia,  aspiration),  mega-colon  (abdominal  distension,  constip ation);  CNS  symptoms. 
Diagnosis:  Acute:  trypomastigotes  in  blood,  CSF,  node  aspirate.  Chronic:  serology 
(Chagas’ IgG ELISA). Treatment: Benznidazole, nifurtimox. eff ective in chronic disease.
Relapsing fever
Caused by spirochaete Borrelia recurrentis (louse-borne, sub-Saharan Africa, refu-
gee camps) or other Borrelia (tick-borne, world-wide). Presentation: Intermittent 
fever  ‘crisis’  due  to  antigenic  variation  (~3d  fever,  then  afebrile  ~7d),  headache, 
myalgia, BP. Diagnosis: Spirochaetes on blood smear, false +ve serology for Lyme 
disease. Treatment: Doxycyline/macrolides (single dose if louse-borne). Neuroborre-
liosis treatment if CNS disease (p422). Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction due to endotoxins 
(?TNF) can mimic fever ‘crisis’: observe 1st ~4h treatment, use cooling/antipyretics.

_OHCM_10e.indb   423

_OHCM_10e.indb   423

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
424

Zoonoses

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Anthrax (Bacillus anthracis)
Gram-positive, aerobic bacillus found in soil worldwide. Humans exposed via infect-
ed livestock or animal products, eg hide, wool, tusks. Infection via inhalation, inges-
tion, contamination of broken skin (includes IV drug use). Bacteria secrete exotoxins: 
oedema toxin and lethal toxin. Presentation:
  • Cutaneous (~95%): itchy papulevesiclenecrotic eschar. Oedema may be strik-

ing. Regional lymphadenopathy, malaise.

  • Inhalation: fever, cough, myalgia, SOB, pleural eff usion (haemorrhagic mediastini-

tis), stridor, death.

  • GI (rare): fever, abdominal pain, ascites, mucosal ulcers, GI perforation.
Diagnosis:  Vesicular  ﬂ uid  culture  (care,  do  not  disseminate),  blood  culture,  anti-
body ELISA, PCR. (NB: not pneumonic so sputum cultures are Ωve). Treatment: Qui-
nolone/doxycycline. Two agents if systemic disease, eg ciproﬂ oxacin+clindamycin or 
linezolid (then narrow according to sensitivity). Consider anti-anthrax monoclonal 
antibody/immunoglobulin as adjunct in inhalational disease.
Bartonella
  • B.  henselae  (cat-scratch  disease):  from  infected  cat  ﬂ eas.  Low-grade  fever,  re-
gional lymphadenopathy. Encephalitis rare. Skin lesions mimic Kaposi’s sarcoma.
  • B. quintana (trench fever): from human body louse. Fever, headache, bone pain.
  • B. bacilliformis (bartonellosis): from infected sandﬂ ies in Andes mountains. Oroya 
fever = fever, headache, myalgia, haemolysis. Later nodularvascular skin lesions.
Diagnosis: Clinical, blood culture (fastiduous  needs prolonged culture), serology. 
Treatment: Cat-scratch disease often self-limiting. Azithromycin, aminoglycoside.
Brucellosis
Most common zoonosis worldwide: 500 000 cases/yr. Gram Ωve infection of cattle, 
swine, goats, sheep, dogs. Human infection via ingestion of infected meat/unpas-
teurized milk/cheese; or through inhalational/mucosal contact with animal body ﬂ u-
ids (eg farmers, slaughterhouse workers, meat packers, hunters). Risk in countries 
without animal health programmes. Presentation: Acute (<1 month), sub-acute (1–6 
months), or chronic (>6 months). Non-speciﬁ c: fever, anorexia, sweats, weight loss, 
malaise ( TB). Localized infection: septic arthritis, spondylitis, meningitis, endo-
carditis, orchitis, abscess. Diagnosis: Culture with prolonged incubation due to slow 
doubling time.17 Serology (four assays performed by Public Health England Brucella 
Reference Unit 0151 529 4900). Treatment: Doxycycline, rifampicin, aminoglycoside, 
ceftriaxone, co-trimoxazole. Needs prolonged course as intracellular with slow dou-
bling time. Relapse usually due to inadequate dose/duration/adherence.
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)
Q fever is derived from the label ‘query’ fever attributed to an unexplained disease in 
Australian abattoir workers. C. burnetii is now recognized as the pathogenic agent. 
Sheep, goats, cattle are main sources of infection (also cats, dogs, rabbits, ducks, 
ticks).  Occurs  worldwide.  Spores  can  survive  in  soil,  animal  products,  and  water 
for months–yr. Transmitted by contact, inhalation of dust, or consumption of raw 
milk products. Presentation: Incubation 3–30d. ~50% asymptomatic. Non-speciﬁ c 
symptoms: fever (1–3wks), nausea, fatigue, headache. Pneumonia in 1–2%: typical or 
atypical, may have rapid progression. Also splenomegaly, granulomatous hepatitis, 
aseptic  meningitis,  encephalitis,  osteomyelitis.  Endocarditis  is  the  most  common 
form of chronic disease. Diagnosis: Coxiella cannot be cultured using routine lab 
methods.17 PCR is rapid. Serology can take 2–6wks to become positive and detects 
variation in lipopolysaccharide  (LPS) coat. Phase  II LPS appears before phase  I LPS 
 acute infection = IgM/IgG to phase II LPS, chronic infection = IgG to phase I LPS. Se-
rology on paired sera 2–4wks apart provides best diagnostic evidence. Treatment: 
Doxycycline. Also rifampicin, chloramphenicol, ﬂ uoroquinolone, macrolide. Hydroxy-
chloroquine  alkalinizes  the  phagosomes  in  which  the  bacteria  resides  and  may   
bactericidal eff ect.

_OHCM_10e.indb   424

_OHCM_10e.indb   424

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
Leptospirosis (Weil’s disease)
Pathogenic leptospire spirochaetes belonging to the subgroup Leptospira interro-
gans. >250 pathogenic serovars. Chronic renal infection of carrier animals: rodent, 
cattle, pigs. Spread by water/soil/food contaminated by infected animal urine. Pres-
entation: Incubation ~7d (2–30d). 1st (acute/septicaemic) phase: fever, non-speciﬁ c 
ﬂ u-like symptoms. Mild/subclinical in ~90%. Followed by recovery or 2nd (immune/
leptospiruric) phase: conjunctival suff usion, myalgia (CK), jaundice, meningitis, uvei-
tis, AKI, pulmonary haemorrhage, ARDS, myo/pericarditis. (Weil’s disease described in 
1886: fever, jaundice splenomegaly, renal failure, CNS symptoms. Term now applied to 
all severe disease.) Diagnosis: In UK18 via National Leptospirosis Service (https://www.
gov.uk/guidance/leptospira-reference-unit-services). Culture (blood/CSF) +ve during 1st phase. 
Serology. PCR. Treatment: Doxycycline, penicillin. Conﬂ icting evidence of beneﬁ t for 
steroids in severe disease.
Yersinia pestis (plague)
Gram Ωve, obligate intracellular pathogen transmitted by small animals and their ﬂ eas 
by bite, direct contact, inhalation or ingestion (rare). ~300 cases/yr worldwide. Presen-
tation: Incubation: 3–7d. Flu-like symptoms, then one of three disease forms:
1      Bubonic: most common form. Yersinia pestis enters at bite and travels via lym-

phatics. Inﬂ amed, painful lymph node is termed ’bubo’ and can suppurate.
2      Septi caemic: direct spread without ‘bubo’, or advanced stage after ‘bubo’.
3      Pneumonic: lung disease. Most virulent, least common. Usually from advanced bu-
bonic form but can then transmit via droplets to other humans without ﬂ eas/animals.
Diagnosis:  Culture  bubo  ﬂ uid,  blood,  sputum.  Rapid  antigen  testing  available.
Treatment: Reduces mortality from 60% to <15%: streptomycin, tetracycline.12 

425

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Toxoplasmosis

Fig 9.34  Oocysts in cat faeces can 
stay  in  the  soil  for  months,  where 
rats eat them. The rats get infected, 
and, under the direction of Toxoplas-
ma  in  the  amygdala,  the  rats  lose 
their fear of cats, and so get eaten in 
turn. So the parasite ensure success 
by facilitating a jump from interme-
diate  to  deﬁ nitive  host.  How  does 
the  parasite  overwhelm  the  innate 
fear  of  cats?  By  causing  a  sexual 
attraction to normally aversive cat 
odour through limbic activity.

From Fernando Monroy:
www2.nau.edu/~fpm/research/res.html

Caused  by  protozoan  Toxoplasma  gondii.  Found  worldwide.  Life  cycle  (ﬁ g 9.34). 
Infection  is  lifelong  (~⅓  of  population).  HIV  may  cause  reactivation  (p400).
Presentation: Asymptomatic in ~90%. Self-limiting cervical lymphadenopathy, low-
grade fever if normal immune system. Disseminated disease if immunosuppressed: 
cerebral  abscess,  encephalitis,  choroidoretinitis,  myocarditis,  myositis,  pneumoni-
tis,  hepatitis.  Congenital  infection:  pregnancy  loss,  neurocognitive  deﬁ cit,  retinal 
damage.  Diagnosis:  In  UK  via  Toxoplasma  Reference  Laboratory  (0179  228  5058). 
Serology:  IgG=previous exposure (high avidity  IgG suggests infection >3–5 months 
ago, used in pregnancy); IgM=acute infection, false +ve or chronic infection with per-
sistent  IgM;  IgA  in  cord  serum=congenital  infection.  PCR:  blood/CSF/urine/amniotic 
ﬂ uid/aqueous/vitreous humour. Treatment:  If eye disease, immunosuppressed or 
neonate: pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine + folinic acid. Corticosteroids for eye inﬂ am-
mation. Spiramycin reduces vertical transmission. Prophylaxis: co-trimoxazole (see 
HIV, p400).
Echinococcosis (hydatid disease) p435. Rabies p437. Hanta virus p426.

_OHCM_10e.indb   425

_OHCM_10e.indb   425

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
426

Viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF)

Viral  haemorrhagic  fever  (VHF)  is  a  term  used  for  severe,  multi-organ  disease  in 
which  the  endothelium  is  damaged,  and  homeostasis  is  impaired.  Haemorrhage 
complicates the disease course and can be life-threatening. VHF classiﬁ cation by viral 
subtype is shown in table 9.22.
Table 9.22  VHF classiﬁ cation (HF=haemorrhagic fever)
Virus family Disease (virus subtype) Details
Filovirus

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Arenavirus 

Bunyavirus

Ebola
Marburg
Lassa fever (Lassa)
Argentinian HF (Junin)
Bolivian HF (Chapare, 
Machupo)
Brazilian HF (Sabia)
Venezualan HF (Guanarito)
Crimean-Congo HF
Hanta 

Rift valley fever

Flavivirus

Dengue
Yellow fever

See Ebola, this page
See Marburg, p427
See Lassa, p427
South American VHF are rare causes of infec-
tion in travellers. Incubation 2–16d. Resemble 
Lassa  fever.  Severe  disease  with  bleeding  in 
~ ⅓ . Supportive treatment. Live vaccine avail-
able for Junin virus. 

See CCHF, p427
Rodent  host.  Incubation  2d-8wk.  Causes:  1 
HF with renal syndrome: fever, headache,  GI 
symptoms, and AKI. 2 Hanta virus pulmonary 
syndrome:  bilateral  interstitial  pulmonary 
inﬁ ltrates,  mortality  30–40%.  Supportive 
treatment.
Endemic  in  Africa.  80%  asymptomatic  or 
self-limiting febrile illness. <2%  CNS involve-
ment/haemorrhagic.
see p420
see p420

The  Advisory  Committee  on 
(ACDP) 
Dangerous  Pathogens 
classiﬁ es a pathogen as Group 4 
(highest)  when  it  causes  severe 
human disease, with high risk of 
spread, and no eff ective prophy-
laxis or treatment. Ebola,19 Mar-
burg, Lassa, and Crimean-Congo 
haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) are all 
Hazard  Group  4  haemorrhagic 
fever  viruses.  They  are  largely 
conﬁ ned to Africa (ﬁ g 9.35), with 
the exception of  CCHF which oc-
curs  in  Africa,  the  Middle  East, 
Eastern Europe, and Asia.
Ebola
Incubation 2–21d (usually 3–12d). Evidence for fruit bats as reservoir. Outbreaks with 
mortality. Largest epidemic (2014–16) due to Ebola virus (EBOV, formally Zaire ebola-
virus): 28 646 cases and 11 323 deaths in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Cytokine 
activationendothelial damage, oedema, coagulopathy, tissue necrosis, multi-organ 
failure. Transmission from index case via mucous membranes, or contact with body 
ﬂ uids (including burial contact), viral shedding in semen. Presentation:
  • Undifferentiated (0–3d). Fever (>38°C axillary), myalgia, weakness, anorexia, head-

Reproduced with permission from Viral haemorrhagic 
fevers: origins, reservoirs, transmission and guidelines, Crown 
copyright 2016. Contains public sector information licensed 
under the Open Government Licence v3.0. 

Fig 9.35  VHF risk in Africa.

ache, sore throat. May not look unwell.

  • GI  (4–10d).  Epigastric/abdominal  pain,  liver  tenderness,  N&V,  hiccups,  diarrhoea, 

hypovolaemia.

  • Late  organ  stage  (>10d).  Haemorrhagic:  petechiae,  ecchymoses,  mucosal  haem-
orrhage,  GI  bleeding,  haemoptysis.  Neurological:  extreme  weakness,  confusion, 
agitation, bradypsychia, coma. Other: hypoglycaemia, electrolyte abnormalities, sec-
ondary infection, shock, DIC, multi-organ failure, death.

_OHCM_10e.indb   426

_OHCM_10e.indb   426

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
427

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

  • Post-infection:  arthralgia,  hepatitis,  orchitis,  transverse  myelitis,  meningitis,

uveitis, vision/hearing impairment, social isolation, psychological eff ects.

Diagnosis: PPE (see BOX ‘Equipment’) if high possibility (see ‘Risk assessment’). WCC, 
plt, AST>ALT. IgM (~day 3), IgG (~day 7), reverse transcriptase PCR on blood/urine/saliva/
throat swab. Exclude malaria. Treatment: Supportive: 
ﬂ uid resuscitation, correct electrolytes/coagulation/glu-
cose, treat secondary infection, nutrition. Ribavirin not 
eff ective. Trace contacts, support family. Experimental: 
anti-RNA  agents,  immunotherapy  with  blood/plasma 
from  survivors,  monoclonal  antibodies  (ZMapp™), 
Ebola vaccine (rVSV-ZEBOV, Ebola ça suffit! trial). Ethics: 
Randomization  versus  compassionate  use:  is  it  ethi-
cal to withhold even potentially beneﬁ cial therapy to 
a control group with a life-threatening condition? Is 
observational data gained through the compassionate 
use of experimental therapy suffi  cient to guide clinical decisions? Where should re-
sources be directed to improve outcome: drug development or basic healthcare provi-
sion, eg would the capacity to check K+ improve mortality?
Marburg, Lassa, and CCHF
Diff erentiating features are given in table 9.23.
Table 9.23  Diff erentiation between VHF

Equipment
  • Double gloves
  • Fluid-repellent gown
  • Full-length plastic apron
  • Head cover (surgical cap)
  • Fluid-repellent footwear
  • Full face shield
  • Full-repellent respirator
  • Meticulous removal.

Clinical features

VHF
Marburg Incubation typically 5–9d. Clinically identical disease course to Ebola. Ebola/

Lassa

CCHF

Marburg suggested by liver tenderness.
~80% mild/asymptomatic. Haemorrhage in ~20%. Variable mortality in dif-
ferent epidemics 25–80%. Exudative pharyngitis. Convalescent hearing loss. 
Observational data shows response to ribavarin if given in ﬁ rst 6d.
Tick-borne. Sudden onset prodrome. Haemorrhagic stage common, develops 
rapidly, but usually short-lived 2–3d. Ribavarin used in treatment (evidence). 

Risk assessment for VHF in UK
Assess for possible transmission and fever.
  • Transmission: 1 Travel to endemic area (rural for Lassa fever; caves/primates/ante-
lopes/bats for Ebola/Marburg; tick/animal slaughter for CCHF). 2 Travel to known 
outbreak (http://www.promedmail.org). 3 Contact with infected specimen.

  • Fever: >37.5°C in the past 24h.
If possible transmission and fever consider ‘high possibility’ (≠high probability), iso-
late, PPE (see BOX ‘Equipment’). Inform local infectious disease team and contact the 
Imported Fever Service (0844 778 8990) for  VHF investigation. Bruising, bleeding, 
and uncontrolled D&V also warrant isolation and discussion if relevant contact history.

Ebola and sacriﬁ ce

This page is dedicated to Dr Sam Brisbane, director of the emergency depart-
ment in Monrovia, Liberia. Caring, light-hearted, intense, profane. In 2013, he ex-
pressed his greatest worry: an epidemic of VHF. A well-founded fear which would 
ultimately prove prophetic, in a hospital with a shortage of personnel, rationing of 
gloves, and limited soap. Universal precautions? Unaff ordable, and not even close.
He was also a coff ee farmer. But not for him a deserved retirement to his planta-
tion, surrounded by photographs of 8 children, 6 adopted children, and grand-
children to match. Unprotected, despite a lucky fedora and a gallows sense of 
humour, he contracted Ebola in 2014 at the age of 74 whilst manning the front line 
of the world’s deadliest VHF epidemic to date. During his illness he told his doctors, 
‘When we ﬁ nd ourselves in the middle of the sea and there are rough waves, we 
should not give up. We should ﬁ ght on to the end’. A truly sagacious man whose 
life and doctoring transcends Western perspectives. We can never replicate your 
courage, because we will never know your fear. It is ﬁ ttingly, the stuff  of legend. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   427

_OHCM_10e.indb   427

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
428

Gastroenteritis: an overview

Gastroenteritis = diarrhoea (± vomiting) due to enteric infection with viruses, bac-
teria, or parasites.
Diarrhoea can be deﬁ ned as:
  • acute diarrhoea: ≥3 episodes partially formed or watery stool/day for <14d
  • dysentery: infectious gastroenteritis with bloody diarrhoea
  • persistent diarrhoea: acutely starting diarrhoea lasting >14d
  • traveller’s diarrhoea: starting during, or shortly after, foreign travel
  • food poisoning: disease (infection or toxin) caused by consumption of food/water.

 Food poisoning is notiﬁ able in the UK (www.gov.uk/health-protection-team).

Gastroenteritis  can  be  classiﬁ ed  according  to  infectious  aetiology  (table  9.24)  or 
predominant clinical presentation (table 9.25, also see p259).
Table 9.24  Gastroenteritis by infectious aetiology
Incubation Notes
Infection Organism
1d
Virus
Norovirus
~50–60%

Page
430

Rotavirus

1–3d

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Bacteria
~30–40%

Parasites
<2%

Astrovirus
Adenovirus
Sapovirus
CMV

Salmonella
(non-typhoidal)
Campylo-
bacter
E. coli

4–5d
3–10d
1–3d
~3–12wks

12–72h

2–5d

1–10d
(usually 3–4d)

Shigella

1–2d

Staphylococ-
cus aureus
Clostridium 
perfringens
Clostridium 
difﬁ cile
Listeria

30min—6h

6–24h

3–70d

2h–5d

Vibrio chol-
erae
Yersinia en-
terocolitica
Bacillus cereus 30min—15h
Giardia

1–3wks

4–7d

Crypto-
sporidium
Entamoeba 
histolytica 

1–12d

2–4wks (can 
be years)

Cyclospora 
cayetanensis
Trichinella

~1wk

1–2d

Important cause of epidemic gastroenteritis. 
600 000–1million cases/yr in UK. 
Aff ects nearly all children by age 5y. Routine, 
childhood (live) vaccine in UK.
Often less severe than norovirus. 
Enteric adenovirus. Mainly children. 
Children. Not common in food-borne disease. 
Usually asymptomatic. If immunosuppression: 
colitis, hepatitis, retinitis, pneumonia.
Under-cooked eggs, poultry, meat.

Under-cooked meat, cross-contamination, un-
pasteurized milk, water. 
Bloody  diarrhoea  if  Shiga-toxin  producing 
E. coli  (STEC)  eg  0157.  Can  cause  HUS.  Under-
cooked beef, unpasteurized milk most common. 
S.  sonnei  most  common.  Deadly  epidemics 
with S. dysenteriae in low-income countries. 
Unpasteurized  milk/cheese,  uncooked  food. 
Multiplication leads to toxin production.
Raw meat. Inadequately reheated food. 

Antibiotic-associated  diarrhoea.  Spore-form-
ing therefore persists: wash your hands. 
Cold  meat,  soft  cheese,  refrigerated  pâté. 
Diarrhoea, fever, myalgia. Severity in immu-
nosuppression  and  pregnancy  (bacteraemia, 
fetal loss).
Human and aquatic reservoirs. Epidemics due 
to inadequate environmental management.
Main source is undercooked pork. Most infec-
tion in young children.
Leftover food, rice. Emetic or diarrhoeal toxins. 
Intestinal  parasite.  Cyst  transfer  via  infected 
faeces, eg contaminated water. Malabsorption. 
Transfer  via  infected  faeces.  Symptoms  and 
severity with immunosuppression, eg HIV.
Asymptomatic carrier, intestinal disease and/
or  extra-intestinal  disease  (liver,  skin,  lung, 
brain).
Transfer via infected faeces. May have relaps-
ing course. 
Enteral  at  1–2d.  Parenteral  at  2–8wks:  larval 
migration,  facial  swelling,  myocarditis,  en-
cephalitis.

430

400, 
405
431

431

391, 
429, 
431
431

388

430

411

389

430

431

432

400, 
432
432

433

433

433

Trichuriasis
Intestinal 
ﬂ ukes

~3months Whipworm. Dysentery with heavy infection.
4d—months Eg Fasciolopsis buski.

_OHCM_10e.indb   428

_OHCM_10e.indb   428

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
429

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Table 9.25  Gastroenteritis by clinical presentation
Diarrhoea without blood (enteritis)
Norovirus
Rotavirus
Astrovirus
Enteric adenovirus
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Enteropathogenic E. coli
Toxin-producing Staph. aureus
Cholera
Clostridium perfringens
Giardia
Cryptosporidium
Cyclospora cayetanensis

CMV

Diarrhoea with blood (dysentery)
Shigellosis (bacillary dysentery)*
Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli
Campylobacter enterocolitis*
Salmonella enterocolitis*
Clostridium difﬁ cile
Yersinia enterocolitis
Entamoebic histolytica (amoebic dysentery)
Trichuriasis (whipworm)

*Milder disease may present as diarrhoea without blood.

Traveller’s diarrhoea
Diarrhoea aff ects 20–60% of travellers.20,21 High-risk areas: South Asia, Central and 
South America, Africa. Major cause = enterotoxigenic E. coli.
Prevention: Boil water, cook thoroughly, peel fruit and vegetables. Avoid ice, sal-
ads, shellﬁ sh. Drink with a straw. Hand washing with soap may  risk.
Presentation: Most diarrhoea is during ﬁ rst week of travel. Symptoms are often 
unreliable indicators of aetiology but the following may be indicative:
  • Enterotoxigenic E. coli: watery diarrhoea preceded by cramps and nausea.
  • Giardia lamblia: upper GI symptoms, eg bloating, belching.
  • Campylobacter jejuni and Shigella: colitic symptoms, urgency, cramps.
Duration of diarrhoea: most <1wk, 10%>1wk, 5% >2wks, 1%>30d.
Treatment:
  • Oral rehydration. Clear ﬂ uid or oral rehydration salts. Home-made oral rehy-
dration recipe: 6 level teaspoons of sugar + half level teaspoon salt in 1L clean, 
drinking water.

  • Antimotility agents, eg loperamide, bismuth subsalicylates. Avoid if severe pain 

or bloody diarrhoea as may indicate invasive colitis.

  • Antibiotics:  usually  not  indicated.  Considered  if  rapid  cessation  of  diarrhoea 
needed and/or limited access to sanitation/healthcare. Reduce diarrhoea from 
~3 to ~1.5 days. Choice depends on allergy, comorbidity, concomitant medica-
tion, and destination of travel: ciproﬂ oxacin 500mg BD for 3d (care quinolone 
resistance, eg SE Asia), rifaximin 200mg TDS for 3d, azithromycin 1g single dose 
or 500mg OD for 3d.

Prophylaxis: Not recommended as severe disease and long-term sequelae rare, 
risk of C. difﬁ cile. Consider in immunosuppressed (transplant, HIV, chemotherapy), 
GI pathology (IBD, ileostomy, short-bowel), risk with dehydration (sickle cell, CKD). 
Care with interactions with usual medications.
  • Ciproﬂ oxacin 500mg OD (80–100% protection).
  • Norﬂ oxacin 400mg OD (75–95% protection).
  • Rifaximin 200mg every 12–24h (72–77% protection).
  • Bismuth subsalicylate 2 tablets QDS (62–65% protection, 1st line in US).
Persistent diarrhoea: Investigate if >14d or dysentery: FBC, U&E, LFT, inﬂ amma-
tory markers, stool microscopy for ova/cysts/parasites (historically 3 samples but 
may not actually improve diagnostic yield, time intensive), molecular testing for 
(pre-deﬁ ned) microbes.  of persistent diarrhoea = Giardia (most common diag-
nosis, send PCR), Entamoeba histolytica, Shigella. Post-infectious irritable bowel 
syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion (in up to 30%).
Do not forget: malaria, HIV.

_OHCM_10e.indb   429

_OHCM_10e.indb   429

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
430

Gastroenteritis: speciﬁ c infections

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Diarrhoea without blood
Norovirus:  Single-stranded  RNA  virus.  Highly  infectious.  Transmission  by  contact 
with infected people, environment, food (~10%). Most common cause of infectious GI 
disease, ~600 000 cases in England/yr. Presentation: 12–48h after exposure, lasting 
24–72h: acute-onset vomiting, watery diarrhoea, cramps, nausea. Virus shed in stool 
even if asymptomatic. Numerous genotypes and unknown longevity of immunity  
repeat infection occurs. Diagnosis: clinical, stool sample reverse transcriptase PCR. 
Treatment: supportive, anti-motility agents, usually self-limiting.
Rotavirus: Double-stranded RNA virus. Wheel-like appearance on EM  ‘rota’. Com-
monest cause of gastroenteritis in children (~50%). Most infected by 5y. Presenta-
tion: incubation ~2d. Watery diarrhoea and vomiting for 3–8d, fever, abdominal pain. 
Diagnosis: clinical, antigen in stool. Treatment: supportive. Routine vaccination in UK 
(p407). Virus shed in stool post vaccine  careful hygiene if immunosuppressed and 
changing nappies. Live vaccine  delay vaccination if in utero biological agents with 
active transfer across placenta (eg inﬂ iximab, adalimumab).
Enterotoxigenic E. coli: Gram Ωve anaerobe. Disease due to heat-stable or heat-
labile toxin which stimulates Na+, Cl- and water effl  ux into gut lumen. ~20% of all 
infective  diarrhoea,  ~80%  of  traveller’s  diarrhoea.  Presentation:  incubation  1–3d. 
Watery diarrhoea, cramps. Lasts ~3–4d. Diagnosis: clinical, identiﬁ cation of toxin 
from stool culture. Treatment: supportive. See Traveller’s diarrhoea p429.
Clostridium  perfringens  (type  A):  Gram  +ve,  anaerobe.  Produces  enterotoxin. 
Spores  survive  cooking  and  germinate  during  unrefrigerated  storage.  2–30  out-
breaks/yr in UK. Presentation: sudden-onset diarrhoea, cramps, usually lasts <24h. 
Diagnosis:  stool  toxin,  quantiﬁ cation  of  faecal  bacteria.  Treatment:  supportive. 
-toxin of C. perfringens type C can cause a necrotizing enteritis with fulminant dis-
ease, pain, bloody diarrhoea, septic shock. -toxin is sensitive to trypsin proteolysis 
so  risk with trypsin inhibition by sweet potatoes, ascaris infection  occurs in New 
Guinea (’pigbel’), central/south America, south-east Asia, China.
Cholera: Vibrio cholerae is a Gram Ωve, aerobic, ‘comma-shaped’ ﬂ agellated motile 
vibrat ing/swarming rod. Found in faecally contaminated water. Serovars O1 and O139 
cause disease. ~190 000 cases in 2014 (ﬁ g 9.36). Last indigenous case in UK in 1893. Pres-
entation:  incubation  2h–5d.  ~75%  asymptomatic  but  shed  bacteria.  Profuse (1L/h) 
diarrhoea (‘rice-water’ stool), vomiting, dehydration, metabolic acidosis, circulatory 
collapse, death. Diagnosis: Clinical: death due to dehydration from watery diarrhoea 
age >5y, or any watery diarrhoea age >5y during known epidemic. Identiﬁ cation of 
serovars 01 or 0139 in stool. Rapid dipstick testing available but culture conﬁ rmation 
recommended.  Treatment:  oral  rehydration  salts  (WHO/UNICEF  ORS  sachet)  will 
treat12 up to 80%. Needs safe water. Adults may need 1L/hr initially: off er 100mL/5 
min. NG if vomiting. IV ﬂ uids if severely dehydrated: Ringer’s lactate or 0.9% saline 
plus ORS (beware  K+) up to 200mL/kg in ﬁ rst 24h. Antibiotics in severe dehydration 
to  diarrhoea: doxycycline (single dose 300mg) or tetracycline (3d course) guided 
by  local  susceptibility  (azithromycin  in  children/pregnancy).  Zinc  shortens  illness 
in child ren (10–20mg/24h). Prevention: cholera loves ﬁ lth: clean water (and clean 
politics) abolishes it. Oral cholera vaccines (56–94% effi  cacy in adults) dependent on 
logistics, cost, production capacity. Antibiotic prophylaxis breeds resistance.

Fig 9.36  Cholera: areas 
reporting outbreaks 
2010–2014.
Reproduced with permis-
sion from World Health 
Organization, Countries 
reporting cholera, 
2010–2015. ©World Health 
Organization 2016. http://
www.who.int/gho/epidemic_dis-

eases/cholera/epidemics/en/

_OHCM_10e.indb   430

_OHCM_10e.indb   430

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
431

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

On the mode of communication of cholera

In 1854, at 40 Broad St, London, a child became ill 
with diarrhoea, dying on 2 September. Her mother 
rinsed  her  soiled  nappies  into  the  house  drains 
where  faulty  brickwork  allowed  mixing  with  the 
water supply of the Broad St pump (ﬁ g 9.37). From 
this  conﬂ uence  sprung  the  discipline  of  Public 
Health. The ensuing deaths from cholera clustered 
around the Broad St pump, as detailed by the lo-
cal doctor, Dr John Snow. He used his now famous 
Voronoi diagram showing the deaths within a ‘line 
of  nearest  pump’  to  motiv ate  the  parish  vestry: 
‘In consequence of what I said, the handle of the 
pump was removed the following day’, so inaugu-
rating the control of cholera. These events illustrate 
a number of truths:

Fig 9.37  Death’s Dispensary, 
George Pinwell, 1866.

© Granger, NYC / Topfoto

1      Knowledge of the microscopic cause of disease is not required for public health 
measures to succeed (Vibrio cholerae was identiﬁ ed by Robert Kock in 1883).
2      Even the most parochial are capable of life-saving action when assisted by a 
doctor in command of the facts.
3      Inﬂ uential friends help. Snow remained largely unknown until the 1930s when 
On the Mode of Communication of Cholera was republished by Wade Hampton 
Frost, ﬁ rst professor of epidemiology at John Hopkins School.
4      Randomization (Broad St pump versus an alternative water supply) is king.

Diarrhoea with blood (dysentery)
Shigella (sonnei, ﬂ exneri, dysenteriae, boydii): Gram Ωve anaerobe. Presentation: 
watery or bloody diarrhoea, pain, tenesmus, fever 1–2d after exposure. Lasts ~5–7d.  
in MSM. Complications: bacteraemia, reactive arthritis (~2% of ﬂ exneri), HUS (Shiga-
toxin-producing dysenteriae, p315). Diagnosis: stool culture. PCR/enzyme immuno-
assay.  Treatment:  supportive.  Nutrition:  green  bananas  (short-chain  fatty  acids 
in colon), zinc if age <6y, vitamin A. Antibiotics if systemically unwell, immunosup-
pressed. Guided by local sensitivities (ciproﬂ oxacin, azithromycin). Avoid antidiar-
rhoeal agents: risk of toxic dilatation.
Enterohaemorrhagic/Shiga-toxin producing E. coli (STEC), eg O157:H7: Gram Ωve 
anaerobe. Produces veratoxins which are ‘Shiga-like’ due to similarity with Shigella 
dysenteriae. Presentation: incubation 3–8d. Diarrhoea, haemorrhagic colitis. HUS in 
up to 10% (p315). Diagnosis: stool culture. PCR/enzyme immunoassay for Shiga-toxin. 
Treatment: Supportive. Do not give antibiotics:  risk of HUS.
Campylobacter: Gram Ωve, spiral-shaped rod. Presentation: incubation 1–10d (usu-
ally  2–5d).  Bloody  diarrhoea,  pain,  fever,  headache.  Complications:  bacteraemia, 
hepatitis,  pancreatitis,  miscarriage,  reactive  arthritis,  Guillain–Barré.  Diagnosis: 
stool culture. PCR/enzyme immunoassay. Treatment: supportive. Antibiotics only in 
invasive cases, refer to local sensitivities (macrolide, doxycycline, quinolone).
Salmonella enterocolitis (non-typhoidal): Gram Ωve, anaerobic, motile bacilli. Pres-
entation: diarrhoea, cramps, fever, usually within 12–36h of exposure. Invasive infec-
tion (<10%) can cause bacteraemia/sepsis, meningitis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis. 
Diagnosis: stool culture. PCR. Treatment: supportive. Meta-analysis shows no evi-
dence of beneﬁ t for antibiotics in healthy people. Consider in severe/extra-intestinal 
disease according to local sensitivities (quinolone, macrolide).
Yersinia  enterocolitica:  Gram Ωve rod. Presentation: incubation 4–7d. Diarrhoea, 
fever,  pain  (may  mimic  appendicitis),  vomiting.  May  last  1–3wk.  Also  erythema 
nodosum,  reactive  arthritis  (~1  month  after  diarrhoea).  Diagnosis:  stool  culture, 
agglutination titres. Treatment: antibiotics in severe disease depending on local sen-
sitivities (aminoglycosides, co-trimoxazole, quinolone).
  See  also:  Staph. aureus  pre-formed  toxin  (p388),  GI  parasites  (pp432–3),
Clostridium difﬁ cile (p411).

_OHCM_10e.indb   431

_OHCM_10e.indb   431

02/05/2017   19:07

02/05/2017   19:07

 
432

Gastrointestinal parasites

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Giardiasis
Giardia  lamblia  (ﬁ g  9.38)  is  a  ﬂ agellate  protozoan.  Faecal–oral 
spread from infected drinking water/food/fomites. Presentation: 
Asymptomatic  in  the  majority.  Incubation  1–3wks.  Diarrhoea, 
ﬂ atulence, bloating, pain, malabsorption. Duration of symptoms 
typically ~2–6wks.  Most  common  diagnosis  if  persistent  travel-
ler’s diarrhoea (p429). Diagnosis: Stool microscopy for cysts and 
troph  ozoites. Intermittent shedding so multiple samples (3) may 
 sensitivity. Faecal immunoassay. PCR for diagnosis/subtype. Duo-
denal ﬂ uid aspirate analysis. Treatment: Hygiene to prevent trans-
mission. Metronidazole (treatment failure in up to 20%), tinidazole 
(single dose), albendazole ( side-eff ects, simultaneous treatment 
of other parasites). Lactose-intolerance develops in 20–40%. No 
treatment for asymptomatic disease in endemic areas due to like-
lihood of re-infection.
Cryptosporidium
Apicomplexan protozoan (ﬁ g 9.39). Ingestion of oocytes in 
infected  water.  Asymptomatic  or  self-limiting  diarrhoea 
in  immunocompetent  hosts.  Chronic/severe  diarrhoea 
with immunosuppression: HIV (p400), transplantation, hy-
pogammaglobulinaemia, immunosuppressive therapy.
Amoebiasis
Protozoan Entamoeba histolytica (ﬁ g 9.40) ~10% world’s 
population, mortality ~100 000/yr.  Faecal–oral spread. .Boil water to destroy cysts. 
Presentation:
  • Asymptomatic passage of cysts in ~90% (‘luminal amoebiasis’).
  • Intestinal amoebiasis: dysentery (often insidious onset/relapsing), pain, colitis, ap-
pendicitis, toxic megacolon. Amoeboma = inﬂ ammatory abdominal mass, usually 
caecal/RIF ± obstruction.

Fig  9.39  Cryptosporidium 
immuno ﬂ u orescence.
© Prof. S Upton; Kansas Univ.

Fig 9.38  Giardia: the 
only dip lo  monadid to 
trouble us.

  • Extra-intestinal (invasive) disease. Amoebic liver abscess in ~1%. Single mass con-
taining ‘anchovy-sauce’ pus. High swinging fever, RUQ pain/tenderness. LFT normal 
or  (cholestatic). 50% have no history of amoebic dysentery. Also peritonitis (rup-
ture of colonic abscess), pleuropulmonary abscess, cutaneous/genital lesions.

Fig 9.40  The lifecycle of Entamoeba histolytica is in two stages: cysts and trophozoites. Cysts 
(10–15μm  across)  typically  contain  four  nuclei  (upper  right  image).  During  excystation  in  the 
gut lumen, nuclear division is followed by cytoplasmic division, giving rise to eight trophozoites. 
Tropho zoites (10–50μm across) contain one nucleus with a central karyosome (lower right image). 
Trophozoites inhabit the caecum and colon. Re-encystation of the trophozoites occurs in the colon, 
and excretion of cysts in faeces perpetuates the lifecycle.

Left hand image from Hutson C et al., ‘Molecular-based diagnosis of Entamoeba histolytica infection’, 
Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine, 1(9): 1–11, 1999, reproduced with permission from Cambridge
University Press. Upper and lower right images courtesy of Prof. S Upton, Kansas University.

_OHCM_10e.indb   432

_OHCM_10e.indb   432

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Diagnosis: Microscopy of stool (cysts and trophozoites, ﬁ g 9.40), aspirate or biopsy 
sample. Enzyme immunoassay: antigen detection as adjunct to microscopy, antibody 
detection in extra-intestinal disease. PCR can distinguish E. histolytica from morpho-
logically  identical  but  non-invasive  E. dispar.  Treatment:  Metronidazole/tinidazole 
for amoebic dysentery and invasive disease. Diloxanide furoate: luminal agent, 10d 
course to destroy gut cysts, given in asymptomatic gut carriers and symptomatic dis-
ease, in addition to other treatment. Abscess may require (image-guided) drainage.
Cyclospora
Coccidean protozoan Cyclospora cayetanensis. ~50 imported 
cases/yr in UK. Presentation: Flu-like prodrome, watery diar-
rhoea, weight loss, marked fatigue, low-grade fever in ~25%. 
Self-limiting  after  7–9wks  in  immunocompetent.  Diagnosis: 
Autoﬂ uorescent oocytes in stool (appear blue-green under UV 
ﬂ uorescence ﬁ g 9.41), PCR. Treatment: Co-trimoxazole.
Nematodes (soil-transmitted helminths and Trichinella)
  • Roundworm:  Ascaris  lumbricoides  ~1  billion  aff ected, 

Fig 9.41  Cyclospora 
oocysts ﬂ uorescence.

Credit: CDC DPDx.

Trichinella spiralis (contaminated meat 
source).

  • Whipworm: Trichuris trichiura, 600–800 

million aff ected.

  • Hookworm:  Necator  americanus,  An-
cylostoma  duodenale  ~700  million  af-
fected.

  • Threadworm:  eg  Strongyloides  sterc-

oralis, 30–100 million aff ected.

433

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.42  Larva currens: a serpinginous maculo-
papular rash pathognomonic of chronic strongy-
loidiasis.  Oedema,  an  urticarial  appearance,  and 
speed of migration (>5cm/hr) distinguish this from 
cutaneous larva migrans which is caused by ani-
mal (dog/cat) hookworm.
Reproduced from Johnson et al., Oxford Handbook 
of Expedition and Wilderness Medicine, 2016, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

One  of  most  common  infections  world-
wide, aff ects poor and deprived (ﬁ g 9.42). 
Parasites  live  in  intestines,  producing 
1000s egg/day in faeces. Humans infected 
by eggs (ascariasis, trichinosis) or larvae 
(Ancylostoma) in contaminated food; or 
via  direct  penetration  of  the  skin  (hook-
worm,  Strongyloides).  Presentation: 
Diarrhoea, abdominal pain, blood/protein 
loss, impaired growth/cognitive development. Pruritus/ur-
ticaria if migration involves skin (Strongyloides ﬁ g 9.42). 
Lung  invasion  (ascariasis,  hookworm,  Strongyloides) 
can lead to a Loeffl  er-like syndrome: cough, SOB, wheeze, 
haemoptysis, consolidation, eosinophilia. Other tissue in-
vasion  (trichinosis):  myalgia,  conjunctivitis,  photophobia, 
meningitis,  encephalitis,  neuropathy.  Diagnosis:  Clinical, 
eggs in stool sample (ﬁ g 9.43). Eosinophilia. Strongyloides 
serology/PCR. Treatment: table 9.26.

Fig 9.43  Ascaris eggs (45≈ 
40μm) &  worm (20cm).

Courtesy of Prof. S Upton; 
Kansas University.

Mechanism

ATP, immobilization and death of worm
Cl- permeability, hyperpolarization, paralysis
Depolarizing neuromuscular blockade causing 
spastic paralysis of worm 
Flaccid paralysis of worm, expel live worm

Table 9.26  Anthelmintic drugs
Drug
Mebendazole Irreversible block of glucose/nutrient uptake 
Albendazole
Ivermectin
Pyrantel 
pamoate
Piperazine
Taeniasis (tapeworm)
Includes  Taenia  solium  (pork,  2–8m,  50 000  eggs/worm),  Taenia  saginata  (beef, 
4–12m, 100 000 eggs/worm), Taenia asiatica (Asian, 4–8m, millions of eggs). Presen-
tation: No or mild GI symptoms, tapeworm segments (proglottids) through anus/in 
faeces. Diagnosis: Eggs/proglottids in faeces. Treatment: Praziquantel, niclosamide.
See also toxoplasmosis (p425), schistosomiasis (p434), cysticercosis (p437).

Indication
Roundworm, whipworm, hookworm
Ascariasis, hookworm, (strongyloides)
Strongyloides, ascariasis
Single dose in threadworm, round-
worm, hookworm
(Ascariasis), pregnancy

_OHCM_10e.indb   433

_OHCM_10e.indb   433

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
434

Schistosomiasis and liver disease

Schistosomiasis (bilharzia)

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig 9.44  Schistosomiasis life cycle.
Reproduced from: Coltart C, CJM Whitty. Schistosomiasis in non-endemic countries. Clin Med 2015;15:67–9. 
www.clinmed.rcpjournal.org/content/15/1/67.full.pdf+html. Copyright © 2015 Royal College of Physicians. Repro-
duced with permission.

Caused by blood-ﬂ ukes (trematode worms) of the genus Schistosoma (table 9.27). 
258 million people in 78 countries required treatment in 2014. The life cycle is shown 
in ﬁ g 9.44. Disease develops after contact with contaminated freshwater (swim-
ming, washing). Symptoms are due to an immune complex response to the migrating 
parasite (Katayama syndrome), or deposition of parasite eggs in body tissues.
Presentation: ~50% asymptomatic or non-speciﬁ c symptoms. Clinical syndromes:
  • Larval penetration: pruritic papular rash (‘swimmer’s itch’).
  • Migration of schistosomules: Katayama syndrome 2–8wks after exposure: fever, 

urticaria, diarrhoea, cough, wheeze, hepato splenomegaly, eosinophilia.

  • Host response to egg deposition:

  • Intestinal disease: pain, diarrhoea, blood in stool, (granulomatous) hepatomeg-
aly, splenomegaly. Heavy chronic infection can cause bowel perforation, hyper-
plasia, polyposis, liver ﬁ brosis, portal hypertensionvarices.

  • Urogenital disease: haematuria, dysuria, ureteric ﬁ brosishydronephrosis, CKD, 
bladder  ﬁ brosis/cancer,  genital  lesions,  vaginal  bleeding,  dyspareunia,  vulval 
nodules, haemospermia, prostatitis.

  • Lung disease: pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale.
  • CNS disease: rare, acute lower limb paraplegia, transverse (‘traveller’s’) myelitis.
Diagnosis: Ova in urine (S. haematobium) or faeces (all other species) is speciﬁ c, 
but sensitivity <50% if light infection. Serology for egg antigen becomes +ve once 
mature ﬂ ukes lay eggs  will be Ωve in Katayama fever. Bowel/bladder histology. 
Chronic S. haematobium: bladder calciﬁ cation on AXR, renal obstruction, hydrone-
phrosis ± thick bladder wall on USS. Treatment: two doses of praziquantel 20mg/
kg PO separated by 4h. Steroids for Katayama fever. If eosinophils >3months after 
treatment look for other helminths (+ve serology can persist for years).
Table 9.27  Parasite species and geographical distribution
Disease form Species
Intestinal

S. mansoni

S. japonica
Other

Urogenital

S. haematobium

Geography
Africa, Middle East, Caribbean, Brazil, 
Venezuela, Suriname
China, Indonesia, Philippines
S. mekongi: Cambodia, Laos; S. guineensis/
intercalatum: rainforests of central Africa
Africa, Middle East, France

_OHCM_10e.indb   434

_OHCM_10e.indb   434

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Echinococcosis (hydatid disease)
Zoonotic disease caused by tapeworms of the genus Echinococcus. Clinically impor-
tant disease forms in humans are:
  • Cystic echinococcosis (hydatid disease, hydatosis): E.  granulosus. Found world-

wide. Usual host is dog. Also goats, swine, horses, cattle, camels, yaks.

  • Alveolar echinococcosis: E. multilocularis. Found in northern hemisphere. Usual 

435

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

hosts are foxes and rodents.

Human ingest parasite eggs via food/water contaminated by animal faeces, or by 
handing animals which are infected with the tapeworm. Disease is due to the devel-
opment of cyst-like larvae in viscera, usually liver/lungs. Presentation: Slow grow-
ing cysts may be asymptomatic for many years. Symptoms and signs depends on 
location:
  • Liver: abdominal pain, nausea, hepatomegaly, obstructive jaundice, cholangitis, PUO.
  • Lung:: dyspnoea, chest pain, cough, haemoptysis.
  • CNS: space-occupying signs.
  • Bone: an interesting osteolytic cause of knee pain, cord compression.
  • Silent disease in breast, kidney, adrenals, bladder, heart, psoas.
Diagnosis: USS/CT/MRI: avascular ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled cysts ± calciﬁ cation ( benign cyst, TB, 
mycoses, abscess, neoplasm). Serology. Positive echinococcal antigen. Treatment: 
Get help (including surgical). Depends on cyst type, location, size, and complications. 
Prolonged  treatment  (months/years)  with  albendazole.  PAIR:  Puncture,  Aspirate, 
Inject (hypertonic saline/chemicals), Reaspirate. Beware spillage of cyst contents: 
praziquantel can be given peri-operatively.
Fasciola hepatica (common liver ﬂ uke)
Parasitic infection. ~2 million infected worldwide. Highest rates of infection in Bolivia 
and Peru. Infective larvae develop in aquatic snail hosts. Humans infected via con-
taminated water, waterplants eg watercress, or by eating the undercooked liver of 
another host animal eg sheep, goat. Disease caused by migration of parasite to bile 
ducts. Presentation: Acute phase with migration from intestine through liver (2–4 
months): abdominal pain, nausea, fever, urticarial rash, eosinophilia. Chronic phase 
with egg production in the bile ducts: cholecystitis, cholangitis, pancreatitis, cirrho-
sis. Diagnosis: Serology in acute and chronic phase. Ova in stool/bile aspirate only 
in chronic phase. Treatment: Triclabendazole as a single dose. Treat all suspected 
cases in endemic areas.
Other liver ﬂ ukes: opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis
Opisthorchis and clonorchis are liver ﬂ ukes acquired by eating contaminated ﬁ sh, 
mainly in south-east Asia. Adult worms lodge in the small bile ducts and gallbladder. 
Presentation: Abdominal pain, GI disturbance, cholecystitis, cholangitis, cholangio-
carcinoma. Diagnosis: Ova in stool. Treatment: Praziquantel.

Tropical liver disease
An  overview  of  the  diff erential  diagnosis  of  tropical/imported  liver  disease  is 
shown in table 9.28.
Table 9.28  Tropical liver disease by presentation22
Presentation
Jaundice/hepatitis

Diff  erential diagnosis
Viral hepatitis, brucellosis, dengue, enteric fever, HIV, 
leptospirosis, malaria, rickettsial infection, sepsis, TB, viral 
haemorrhagic fever, yellow fever
Amoebic/pyogenic liver abscess, echinococcosis, liver 
ﬂ uke, carcinoma

Hepatomegaly

Massive hepatomegaly Visceral leishmaniasis, tropical lymphoma, late-stage 

Fibrosis/cirrhosis

schistosomiasis
Chronic hepatitis, schistosomiasis, alcohol, non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease 

Consider liver toxicity: ackee fruit (Jamaica), aﬂ atoxins (peanuts, corn, tropical 
countries without monitoring/regulation), death cap mushroom, iron, bush tea, 
methanol, copper, paraquat, pyrrolizidine alkaloids (herbal remedies). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   435

_OHCM_10e.indb   435

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
436

Neurological disease

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Fig  9.45  Spasm  causing  opisthotonus (arching  of 
body with neck hyperextension).  tetanus, rabies, 
cerebral malaria, neurosyphilis, acute cerebral injury, 
catatonia.

Botulism
Neuroparalytic  infection  caused  by  neurotoxin  from  anaerobic,  spore-forming 
Clostridium  botulinum (rarely C. butyricum, C. barattii). Food-borne due to toxin 
production in food (botulus is Latin for sausage), or wound botulism due to spore 
germination in wound (includes IV drug use). Toxin blocks release of acetyl choline 
at neuromuscular junction causing ﬂ accid paralysis. Presentation: Incubation up 
to 8d (usually 12–36h). Afebrile, descending, ﬂ accid paralysis: diplopia, ptosis, dysar-
thria, dysphagia, progressive paralysis of limbs, respiratory failure. Autonomic signs: 
dry mouth, ﬁ xed/dilated pupils, urinary/cardiac/GI dysfunction. No sensory signs. 
Diagnosis: Clinical: do not delay treatment. Take samples (serum, faeces, wound 
swab) for later conﬁ rmation by culture/PCR. In UK contact GI Bacteria Reference Unit 
(020 8327 7887). Treatment: Get help. Admit to ITU. Botulinum antitoxin (from Public 
Health England, Colindale 020 8200 4400), benzylpenicillin, metronidazole.
Tetanus
Caused  by  anaerobic  Clostridium 
tetani  spores  universally  present  in 
soil. Enters body via a breach in skin. 
Produces  a  neurotoxin  (tetanospas-
min)  which  disseminates  via  blood/
lymphatics  and  interferes  with  neu-
rotransmitter  release  causing  unop-
posed muscle contraction and spasm 
(tetanus  =  ‘to  stretch’).  ~6  cases/yr 
in England and Wales (2015). Mater-
nal  and  neonatal  tetanus  important 
cause  of  preventable  mortality  in 
low–middle  income  countries.  Pres-
entation: Site of entry may be trivial/unnoticed. Incubation ~3–21d. Prodrome: fever, 
malaise,  headache.  Trismus  (lockjaw,  Greek  ‘trismos’  =  grinding).  Risus  sardonicus 
=  a  grin-like  posture  of  hypertonic  facial  muscles.  Opisthotonus  (ﬁ g  9.45).  Muscu-
lar  spasms  induced  by  movement,  injections,  noise,  then  spontaneous.  Dysphagia. 
Autonomic dysfunction: arrhy thmias ± ﬂ uctuating BP. Respiratory arrest. Diagnosis: 
Clinical. Detection of tetanus toxin/isolation of C. tetani. Treatment:  Get help on 
ITU: level of supportive care predicts outcome. Tetanus immunoglobulin  (TIG)  IM (or 
equine antitetanus serum if not available). Take blood for detection of tetanus-toxin 
and anti-tetanus antibodies ﬁ rst. Wound debridement, metronidazole. Management 
of spasm: diazepam/lorazepam/midazolam (may need high doses IV), IV magnesium 
sulphate,  baclofen  (intra-thecal  administration  needed  for  penetration  of  blood–
brain  barrier    only  with  ICU  ventilatory  support),  dantrolene,  botulinum  toxin-A.23 
Vaccination: Routine in UK (p407). Prophylaxis following injury: TIG if heavy contami-
nation. If vaccination history unknown/incomplete: TIG plus dose of vaccine in a dif-
ferent site. Precautionary travel booster if >10y since last dose.
Poliomyelitis
A highly infectious picornavirus, transmitted via faeco–oral route or contaminated 
food/water. Replicates in intestine. Invades nervous system with destruction of an-
terior horn cells/brain stemirreversible paralysis. Incidence by 99% since forma-
tion of Global Polio Eradication Initiative in 1988. 74 cases in 2015. Remains endemic 
in Afghanistan and Pakistan (2016).12 Presentation: Incubation 7–10d. Flu-like pro-
drome in ~25%. Pre-paralytic stage: fever, HR, headache, vomiting, neck stiff ness, 
tremor, limb pain. ~1 in 200 progress to paralytic stage: LMN/bulbar signs ± respira-
tory failure. No sensory signs. Post-polio syndrome in ~40% of survivors (up to 40y 
later): new progressive muscle weakness, myalgia, fatigue.
Diagnosis:  Viral  culture  of  stool  (most  sensitive,  2  samples  >24h  apart),  pharyn-
geal swabs, blood, CSF. PCR can diff erentiate wild-type from vaccine. Paired serol-
ogy. Treatment: None. Vaccination: Salk (inactivated, IM) or Sabin (live, oral). In 
previously endemic areas 200 million volunteers have vaccinated 3 billion children, 
preventing 1.5 million deaths in the last 20y.

© Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

_OHCM_10e.indb   436

_OHCM_10e.indb   436

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
437

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Rabies
Rhabdovirus transmitted through saliva or CNS tissue, usually from the bite of an 
infected mammal, eg bat (in  UK), dog (95% of transmissions to humans), cat, fox. 
Disease is fatal once symptoms appear. Worldwide distribution. ~50 000 deaths/yr, 
most  in  Africa/Asia.  Presentation:  Incubation  ~9–90d.  Prodrome:  headache,  ma-
laise, odd behaviour, agitation, fever, paraesthesia at bite/wound site. Progresses 
to one of two disease forms:
  • ‘Furious rabies’: hyperactivity and terror (hydrophobia, aerophobia)
  • ‘Paralytic rabies’: ﬂ accid paralysis in the bitten limbcomadeath.
Diagnosis:  Clinical:  potential  exposure  +  signs  of  myelitis/encephalitis  (non-pro-
gressive disease and disease >3wk are negative indicators). Viral PCR (saliva, brain, 
nerve tissue) or CSF antibodies may off er later (post-mortem) conﬁ rmation. Treat-
ment:  If bitten, or lick to broken skin, wash (>15min) with soap and seek urgent 
help. Post-exposure prophylaxis: vaccination ± rabies immunoglobulin. Experimental 
treatments: ribavirin, interferon alfa, ketamine. Preventable and elimination feasible 
with pre-exposure vaccination of all at risk. Vaccination of dogs can  human cases.
Japanese encephalitis virus
Flavivirus spread by mosquitoes. Endemic transmission (~3 billion at risk) and com-
mon cause of viral encephalitis in Asia and west Paciﬁ c. Severe disease is rare (1 in 
250) but leads to neurological or psychiatric sequelae in up to 50%, mortality up to 
30%. Presentation: Incubation 5–15d. Most asymptomatic, or mild fever and head-
ache only. Severe disease: high fever, headache, meningism, altered mental status, 
coma, seizures, spastic paralysis, death. Diagnosis: Clinical in endemic area. Serum/
CSF serology, PCR.7 Treatment: Supportive. Vaccination.
West Nile virus
Mosquito-borne ﬂ avivirus with transmission in Europe, Middle East, Africa, Asia, 
Australia, and Americas. Presentation: Incubation 2–14d. Asymptomatic in ~80%. 
West Nile fever in ~20%: fever, headache, N&V, lymphadenopathy. Neuroinvasive in 
~1%: encephalitis, meningitis, ﬂ accid paralysis, mortality ~10%. Diagnosis: Serum/
CSF IgM, viral PCR. Treatment: Supportive. Vaccine awaited (2016).
Neurocysticercosis
Most common helminthic disease of the CNS and most frequent cause of preventable 
epilepsy (~50% of epilepsy in endemic areas, ﬁ g 9.46). Caused by pork tapeworm 
Taenia solium. Consumption of infected pork leads to intestinal infection (taeniasis) 
and the shedding of T. solium eggs in stool. Invasive disease occurs when the shed 
eggs are ingested via faeco–oral transmission. Neurocysticercosis is due to larval 
cysts  infecting  the  CNS.  Presentation:  Determined  by  site  and  number  of  lesions 
(cysticerci) within the brain/spinal cord. Epilepsy in 70%. Focal neurology in ~20%: 
motor/sensory 
lan-
guage  disturbance,  invol-
untary  movements.  Also 
loss, 
visual 
headache, 
meningitis, 
hydrocepha-
lus,  cognitive  impairment. 
Diagnosis:  CT/MRI  imaging 
plus  serology.  Treatment: 
Seizure  control  (evidence 
on  drug  choice,  length  of 
treatment  or  prophylaxis). 
Neurosurgical  advice 
if 
hydrocephalus/ICP.  Alben-
dazole 
for  non-calciﬁ ed 
lesions  (better  penetration 
of  CNS  than  praziquantel). 
Beware  inﬂ ammatory  re-
sponse provoked by treatment— consider dexamethasone.

Fig 9.46  Endemicity (red) and suspected endemicity (orange) 
of Taenia solium 2015.
Reproduced with permission from WHO, Endemicity of Taenia solium, 
2015. ©World Health Organization 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/Endemicity_Taenia_Solium_2015–1000x706.jpg?ua=1

loss, 

7  Specialist diagnostic service and advice in UK via Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory (RIPL): www.
gov.uk/government/collections/rare-and-imported-pathogens-laboratory-ripl

_OHCM_10e.indb   437

_OHCM_10e.indb   437

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
438

Eye disease

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Conjunctivitis
Common in tropical areas. Vision is normal. Diff erentiation between common infec-
tious causes is outlined in table 9.29.
Table 9.29  Common causes of conjunctivitis
Cause
Bacterial
Viral
Trachoma 
(chlamydial)

Secretions
Purulent
Watery
Mucopurulent Follicles and papillae on lid Azithromycin PO or topical 

Treatment
Topical antibiotics for 5d
Symptomatic

Features
Red and swollen
± Corneal lesion

tetracycline

Reproduced from Brent et al., Oxford Handbook of Tropical Medicine, 2014, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Trachoma
Leading infectious cause of blindness worldwide: visual impairment/blindness in 1.9 
million, 200 million at risk. Prevalence in endemic areas 60- 90% (Africa, Central and 
South America, Asia, Middle East). Caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. Human-to-
human transmission with contact, or via ﬂ ies which land on noses/eyes. Presenta-
tion: Active infection causes purulent discharge and follicular inﬂ ammation of the 
eyelid (ﬁ g 9.47a)scarring (fig 9.47b)eyelids turn inwards (entropion) and irritate 
the cornea (trichiasis) (fig 9.47c) leading to visual loss.
Treatment:  WHO  public  health  strategy  SAFE:  surgery  to  treat  blinding  disease 
(trichiasis), antibiotics (azithromycin) to clear infection (mass administration in en-
demic areas through International Trachoma Initiative), facial cleanliness, environ-
mental improvement with access to water and sanitation.12
(c)
(b)
(a)

Fig 9.47  (a) Follicular trachoma. (b) Scarring. (c) Trichiasis.

Reproduced from Warrell et al., Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Immunosuppression and the eye
  • Herpes zoster ophthalmicus:
Due  to  reactivation  of  latent  varicella  zoster  virus 
(p404)  in  the  ophthalmic  branch  of  the  trigeminal 
nerve.  Risk of reactivation and ocular complications 
in  immunosuppression:  HIV,  post-transplantation. 
Presentation: vesiculomacular skin rash and dysaes-
thesia in ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve 
(ﬁ g 9.48). Hutchinson’s sign = lesion at tip/side of nose 
indicates involvement of nasociliary branch of V1 and 
chance of eye involvement. Complications: corneal 
opaciﬁ cation, uveitis, ocular nerve palsy, eyelid de-
formity, optic neuritis, post-herpetic neuralgia. Can 
be sight-threatening  recognition and urgent treatment 
are required. Diagnosis: clinical. Antibody staining/PCR of 
skin scrapings. Treatment: oral famciclovir/valacyclovir or 
systemic aciclovir reduce complications if given within 72h 
of symptoms. Analgesia. If retinitis IV cidofovir ± intravit-
real ganciclovir or foscarnet.
  • CMV retinitis:
Reactivation  of  CMV  infection  (p405).  Presentation: 
ﬂ oaters due to inﬂ ammatory cells in vitreous, ﬂ ashing 
lights, scotomata, eye pain, visual loss. Peripheral lesions 

Fig 9.48  Herpes zoster ophthalmicus.
©MN Oxman , University of California.

Fig  9.49  CMV  retinitis  (moz-
zarella pizza fundus).

©Prof Trobe.

_OHCM_10e.indb   438

_OHCM_10e.indb   438

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
439

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

may be asymptomatic. Routine examination for those at 
risk (CD4<100 cells/microlitre). Diagnosis: clinical. Fundos-
copy:  granular  white  dots,  haemorrhage  (ﬁ g  9.49).  Can 
progress to an arcuate/triangular zone of infection, or can 
be linear following vessels/nerve ﬁ bres. Treatment: sys-
temic valganciclovir (oral, IV). Also ganciclovir, foscarnet, 
cidofovir. ART if underlying HIV (see p402).
  • Ocular toxoplasmosis:
Causes  posterior  uveitis.  Presentation:  blurred  vision/
ﬂ oaters. Diagnosis: clinical. Fundoscopy (ﬁ g 9.50): focus 
of choroiditis, chorioretinal scar from previous infection, 
overlying  vitreal  haze  due  to  inﬂ ammatory  response. 
Multiple/bilateral/extensive lesions if  immunosuppression. Serology. Ocular ﬂ uid 
PCR. Treatment: atovaquone (toxicity), sulfadiazine, and pyrimethamine.
Filarial infection
Onchocerciasis (‘river blindness’)
Caused by ﬁ larial worm, Onchocerca volvulus. Transmitted by the bite of infected 
black  ﬂ ies  which  breed  in  fast-ﬂ owing  rivers  and  streams.  Second  most  com-
mon infectious cause of blindness worldwide: predominantly sub-Saharan Africa, 
Brazil, Venezuela, Yemen. Presentation: A nodule forms at the site of the bite 
where larvae mature to adult worms. The female adult can release up to 1000 
microﬁ lariae/day causing:
  • skin disease: altered pigment ation, licheniﬁ cation, loss of elasticity, poor healing
  • eye disease: keratitis, uveitis, cataract, ﬁ xed pupil, fundal degeneration, optic 

Fig  9.50  Retinal  toxoplas-
mosis.                        ©Prof Trobe.

neuritis/atrophy, visual impairment/loss (ﬁ g 9.51)

  • impaired lymphatic function: lymphadenopathy, elephantiasis.
Diagnosis: Visualization of microﬁ laria in eye or on skin snip biopsy: a ﬁ ne shav-
ing of clean skin is incubated in 0.9% saline to allow microﬁ lariae to emerge for 
microscopic identiﬁ cation. Serology. Treatment: Ivermectin 150mcg/kg, one dose 
every 3–12 months (depending on likely re-exposure). CI if coexisting Loa-Loa due 
to risk of fatal encephalitic reaction. Or 6wk doxycycline. No vaccine available.

Fig  9.51  Bilateral  sclerosing 
keratitis 
in  onchocerciasis 
causing blindness.

Reproduced from Warrell et al. 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 
2010, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig  9.52  Migrating  Loa  loa 
in the skin.

Reproduced from Warrell et al. 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 
2010, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig 9.53  Loa loa crossing the 
conjunctiva.
Reproduced from Warrell et al. 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 
2010, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Loiasis (African eye-worm)
Caused by parasitic worm Loa loa. Transmitted via bite of deerﬂ ies (=mangrove/
mango  ﬂ ies)  which  breed  in  rainforests  of  west  and  central  Africa.  Presenta-
tion: Recurrent pruritic lesions due to angioedema (‘Calabar swellings’), myalgia, 
arthralgia. The adult worm can migrate through subcutaneous (ﬁ g 9.52) and sub-
conjunctival (ﬁ g 9.53) tissue: ‘Something’s wiggling in my eye, doctor’. This eerie 
eye trip causes intense conjunctivitis, which heals if left alone. (Don’t treat until 
transmigration in the eye is over: on detecting your therapy the worm tends to 
panic.) Also causes glomerulonephritis, and encephalitis. Diagnosis : Microﬁ lar-
iae on blood smear, serology, PCR. Eosinophilia. Treatment: Diethylcarbamazine 
(DEC) kills both microﬁ lariae and adult worms. Risk of encephalopathy is related 
to microﬁ larial load: albendazole can be used to  microﬁ larial load prior to DEC 
(response may be slow).
See also lymphatic ﬁ lariasis p421.

_OHCM_10e.indb   439

_OHCM_10e.indb   439

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
440

Skin disease

Dermatoses occur in 8–23% of travellers and are the 3rd most common health prob-
lem in travellers after diarrhoea and fever. The diff erential of skin problems in travel-
lers in outlined in ﬁ g 9.54.

Skin problem

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Infectious
(more common)

Non-infectious
(less common)

Cosmopolitan
infection (~75%)

  • Scabies
  • Bacterial infection
  • Superﬁ cial fungal
  • Swimmer’s itch (p434)
  • Herpes simplex
  • Herpes zoster

Tropical disease
(~25%)
  • Cutaneous larva migrans 

(p433, ﬁ g 9.42)

  • Cutaneous leishmaniasis
  • Myiasis
  • Tungiasis
  • Rickettsial infection 

  • Arthropod bite
  • Allergic reaction
  • Sunburn
  • Injury
  • Animal bite

(p422)

  • Dengue (p420)
  • Filariasis (p421)
  • Leprosy
  • Yaws

Fig 9.54  Skin problems in travellers.

Adapted from Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease, 7(3), O’Brien, BM, ‘A practical approach to com-
mon skin problems in returning travellers’, 125–46. Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.

Scabies
Caused  by  microscopic  mite  Sarcoptes  scabiei. 
Found  worldwide,  ~300  million  cases/yr.  Female 
mites burrow into the epidermis and deposit eggs. 
Symptoms due to an allergic reaction to the parasite. 
Transmission  via  direct  and  prolonged  skin-to-skin 
contact. Epidemics linked to poverty, overcrowding, 
and poor water supply. Presentation: Severe (noc-
turnal) pruritus, papular/scaly rash, burrows may be 
visible (ﬁ g 9.55). Itch can lead to secondary bacterial 
infection. Diagnosis: Clinical. Skin scraping for mite/
eggs/faeces. Treatment: Topical permethrin 5% or 
malathion 0.5%. Ivermectin given for ﬁ lariasis (p421) 
may eff ectively treat concurrent scabies.
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
Most  common  form  of  leishmaniasis.  Esti-
mated 0.7–1.3 million new cases/yr: Americas, 
Mediterranean  basin,  north  Africa,  Middle 
East,  central  Asia.  Presentation:  Lesions 
develop  at  the  bite  site,  beg  inning  as  an 
itchy papule; crusts fall off  to leave a pain-
less ulcer with a well-deﬁ ned, raised border 
and  a  crusted  base  =  ‘Chiclero’s  ulcer’  (ﬁ g 
9.56).  Diagnosis:  Skin  biopsy  +  PCR.  Treat-
ment: Most heal in ~2–15 months with scar-
ring (disﬁ guring if extensive). ‘New World‘ 
disease (South America) needs treating due 
to risk of mucocutaneous disease: pentava-
lent  antimony,  eg  meglumine  antimoniate, 
sodium stibogluconate. (See p423.)

Fig 9.55  Scabies burrow.
Reproduced from Burge et al., Oxford 
Handbook of Medical Dermatology, 
2016, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 9.56  Cutaneous leishmaniasis with cen-
tral crusting.
Reproduced from Lewis-Jones, Paediatric Der-
matology, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   440

_OHCM_10e.indb   440

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
441

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Myiasis
Infection  with  ﬂ y  larvae/maggot.  Can  aff ect  living 
and necrotic tissue. In south and central America the 
human botﬂ y lays its eggs on mosquitoes which de-
posit them when they bite. In sub-Sahran Africa the 
tumbu ﬂ y lays its eggs on clothing which then trans-
fer to skin. Presentation: Painful swelling. May have 
sensation of movement within the lesion. May open 
to reveal larval breathing tubes (ﬁ g 9.57). Diagnosis: 
Clinical. Identiﬁ cation of larvae in lesion. Treatment: 
Petroleum or pork fat cause asphyxiation of the mag-
got causing it to protrude further out of the skin ena-
bling removal with tweezers. Care: backward-facing 
spines  in  American  disease  may  prevent  complete 
removal unless done surgically. Ensure tetanus vac-
cination is up to date.
Tungiasis
Infection of the skin by the sand/jigger ﬂ ea Tunga  penetrans. Acquired (usually 
walking barefoot) in sandy soil, rainforests, and banana plantations in south and 
central America, sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Caribbean. Presentation: Painful, itchy 
papule on the feet. May be visible extrusion of eggs. Black crusting when ﬂ ea dies. 
Diagnosis: Clinical. Treatment: None, self-limiting.
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
Caused  by  slow-growing,  acid-fast  Mycobacterium  leprae  which  aff ects  skin, 
nerves, and mucous membranes. Incubation 5–20y. Transmitted via droplets from 
nose/mouth during close and frequent contact. Classiﬁ ed as:
  • Multibacillary (‘lepromatous’): immune response, bacilli, +ve smear.
  • Paucibacillary  (‘tuberculoid’):  immune  response,  granulomata  with  bacilli, 

Fig 9.57  Myiasis.
Reproduced under Creative Commons 
CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain from 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/

File:Miasis_human.jpg

smears may be Ωve.

Free treatment through WHO since 1995: prevalence  by 99% to 176 000 in 2014 (5.2 
million in 1985).12 Presentation: Hypopigment-
ed skin lesions (ﬁ g 9.58, less well demarcated 
than  vitiligo),  sensory  loss,  thickened  nerves, 
nodules,  plaques,  nasal  congestion,  epistaxis, 
muscle  weakness,  paralysis,  neuropathic  ul-
cers.  Eye  involvement:  chronic  iritis,  scleritis, 
episcleritis, corneal sensation (V nerve palsy), 
blinking and lagophthalmos (VII nerve palsy),  
trauma from eyelashes (trichiasis). Diagnosis: 
Clinical, +ve skin smear, skin biopsy. Serology 
unreliable. Treatment: WHO multidrug therapy:
  • Multibacillary:  Rifampicin  600mg/month, 
dapsone 100mg OD, clofazimine 300mg/month 
and 50mg OD. Duration: 1yr.
rifampicin 

Fig 9.58  Leprosy: hypopigmented mac-
ules. 
Courtesy of Prof. Jayakar Thoma.

  • Paucibacillary: 

600mg/month, 

dapsone 
100mg OD. Duration: 6 months. If single lesion: rifampicin 
600mg+oﬂ oxacin 400mg+minocycline 100mg (single dose).

Yaws
Chronic  granulomatous  disease  caused  by  Treponema 
pertenue.  Found  in  humid/rainforest  areas  in  Africa, 
Asia,  Latin  American,  Paciﬁ c.  Associated  with  socio-
economic  conditions.  Transmission  via  direct  contact. 
Presentation: Primary disease = papilloma. If untreated 
will ulcerate (ﬁ g 9.59). Secondary disease: yellow skin le-
sions, dactylitis. cvs and CNS complications do not occur. 
Diagnosis:  Serology  is  indistinguish able  from  syphilis 
(Treponema  pallidum).  Dual-path  platform  (DPP)  assay 
can distinguish between current and past infection.  PCR. 
Treatment: Single-dose azithromycin PO.

Fig 9.59  Ulceropapilloma-
tous yaws.

Courtesy of Dr B Hudson,
Sydney, Australia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   441

_OHCM_10e.indb   441

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
442

Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO)

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

This chapter gives guidance on hundreds of pyrexia-causing infections; but what 
should you do if your patient has a fever that you cannot explain? Pyrexia of un-
known origin (PUO)24 has a diff erential of >200 diseases. 15–30% of these patients will 
eventually be given an infective diagnosis (depending on your corner of the globe). 
~20% will remain undiagnosed, but in most of these the fever will resolve within 4wks.
Diagnostic criteria
Pyrexia >3wks with no identiﬁ ed cause after evaluation in hospital for 3d or ≥3 
out-patient visits.
Fever may also be undiagnosed in speciﬁ c subgroups despite appropriate evaluation 
for 3d, including negative cultures at ≥ 2 days:
  • Nosocomial PUO: Patient hospitalized for >48h with no infection at admission.
  • Immunodeﬁ cient PUO: Pyrexia in patient with <500 neutrophils/microlitre.
  • HIV PUO: Pyrexia in HIV infection lasting 3d as an in-patient or >4wks as an outpatient.
History
Most PUO are due to common diseases with atypical presentation. Consider all de-
tails as potentially relevant. Include: travel (p414), diet, animal contact, changes in 
medication, recreational drug use, obstetric/sexual history, family history (table 9.30).
Examination
Conﬁ rm fever. Pattern of fever is rarely helpful (contrary to the textbooks, most ma-
laria has no speciﬁ c pattern). Do not forget: mouth, genitals, skin, thyroid, lymphatic 
system, eyes including retina, temporal arteries (table 9.30).
Investigation
Extent of investigation depends on immune status and how well the patient is.
  • Blood tests: FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP, ESR, electrophoresis, LDH, CK, ANA, ANCA, rheumatoid fac-

tor, HIV test, malaria smear, interferon-gamma release assay for TB (p394).
  • Microscopy and culture: Blood ≈3, urine, sputum (including AFB), stool, CSF.
  • Imaging: CXR, abdominal/pelvic USS, venous Doppler. Consider: CT(PA), MRI, echo (TOE). 
Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (FDG-PET) highlights areas of glucose uptake including tu-
mour and inﬂ ammation. It may aid/direct diagnosis in up to 50% of PUO.

  • Other: Hepatitis serology, CMV, EBV, autoimmune screen, cryoglobulins, toxoplasmo-

sis, brucellosis, Coxiella, lymph node biopsy, endoscopy, temporal artery biopsy.

Table 9.30  PUO diff erential according to history and examination ﬁ ndings 
History
Animal contact

Diff  erential
Brucellosis, toxoplasmosis, Bartonella, leptospirosis, Q fever, 
psittacosis
TB, PE, Q fever, enteric fever, sarcoidosis, legionnaire’s disease
Sinusitis, GPA, relapsing fever, psittacosis
TB, Cryptococcus, sarcoid, carcinomatosis, brucellosis, enteric fever
SLE, infective endocarditis, Lyme disease, brucellosis, TB, IBD
Malignancy, vasculitis, TB, HIV, IBD, thyrotoxicosis
Familial Mediterranean fever
Drug-induced fever (~7–10d after new drug)
Diff  erential
Leptospirosis, relapsing fever, spotted fever, trichinosis
TB, sarcoid, adult Still’s disease, SLE, Behçet’s disease
Dental abscess, Behçet’s disease, CMV, IBD

Cough
Nasal symptoms
Confusion
Arthralgia
Weight loss
Family history
Drug history
Examination
Conjunctivitis
Uveitis
Mouth
Lymphadenopathy Lymphoma, TB, EBV, CMV, HIV, toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, Bartonella
Rash

HIV, EBV, SLE, vasculitis, Still’s disease, endocarditis

Hepatomegaly

Splenomegaly

TB, EBV, malignancy, malaria, enteric fever, granulomatous hepatitis, 
Q fever, visceral leishmaniasis
Leukaemia, lymphoma, TB, brucellosis, infective endocarditis, CMV, 
EBV, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoid, enteric fever, relapsing fever
Chronic pyelonephritis, perinephric abscess, renal tumour

Renal
Epididymo-orchitis TB, lymphoma, EBV, brucellosis, leptospirosis

_OHCM_10e.indb   442

_OHCM_10e.indb   442

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
443

s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
s
u
o
i
t
c
e
f
n
I

Eliciting the weird and the wonderful
Listen to your patient You have two cultures to master: the host and the patho-
gen. Prolonged immersion in both may be needed.
Ask Do not expect to ﬁ nd apposite questions such as these in any other textbook:
1      ‘Have you delivered any septic babies in the last year?’ Impress and cure 
your obstetrician friends who tell you that ‘I’m so depressed about not being 
able to shake off  this ﬂ u’, and who have forgotten about transfer of brucellosis 
from baby to obstetrician.

2      ‘Are your carp well at present?’ Mycobact erium marinum skin infection.
3      ‘Could that be a Hyalomma tick bite from when you rode your ostrich in 

last week’s race?’ Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever.

4      ‘Who has been licking your face recently?’ Pasteurella multocida.
5      ‘Has your dog been on holiday this year?’ Monkeypox from prairie dogs.
6      ‘Has your pet hedgehog lost weight?’ Salmonella.
7      ‘Did you develop your headache after you adopted your pet magpie?’ Zo-

onotic transmission of Cryptococcus neoformans causing meningitis.

8      ‘Did  you  have  a  stray  pig  living  under  your  house  when  the  monsoon

started?’ Pigs + standing water + mosquitoes = Japanese encephalitis.

9      ‘Did you sample the local frog paella?’ Angiostrongyliasis causing eosino-

philic meningitis.

10      ‘Did your goat miscarry last year?’ Coxiella burnetii.
11      ‘Did  your  depressed  pig  develop  a  purple  snout?’  Erysipelothrix  rhusi-

opathiae endocarditis via swine erysipelas.

12      ‘Can I see your pet lobster: he may be the cause of your bad hand?’ Lob-
sterman’s hand, an erysipeloid infection from Erysipelothrix. Pet lobsters have 
a grand pedigree. Gérard de Nerval used to take his 
pet lobster for walks, on a blue silk lead, beside the 
Seine (ﬁ g 9.60). A lobster, he said, is, ‘serious-minded 
and  quiet,  doesn’t  scratch  or  bark  like  a  dog,  and 
knows  all  of  the  secrets  of  the  deep’.  His  lobster’s 
mission was to combat the Philistinism chaining us 
all to mediocrity.

Fig 9.60  ‘Is your pet lobster 
well?’ (Gérard de Nerval).

Ask also, ‘Where have you been?’ Though you will not be 
absolved of thought, even when the answer is, ‘South-
end’.  It  may  be  a  question  of  amnesic  stopovers.  Or 
perhaps your patient is an airport baggage-handler, bitten by a hitch-hiking mos-
quito. And even when there has been no travel to the tropics, global warming is 
ensuring that the tropics are travelling to us. To the ﬁ rst writers of medical books, 
Paradise was just beyond the Far East, and the world was a disc surrounded by 
oceans of blue water. But the world moves on, tarnished, tawdry, and trashed; and 
Paradise appears to be evolving with ever more serpents in the garden, beguiling 
us with ambiguous answers to our great questions.
Don’t give up If the culture is negative, tests may need repeating. Perhaps the 
organism is ‘fastidious’ in its nutritional requirement or requires a longer incuba-
tion? Even if culture is achieved, it may be that the organism grown is ﬂ ora not 
pathogen. If culture fails, look for antibodies or antigen. PCR is increasingly used 
for identiﬁ cation, but it is far from infallible; beware of inhibitors, contamination, 
and a primer that is not as unique as your patient.
Remember Sherlock: ‘My mind,’ he said, ‘rebels at stagnation. Give me prob-
lems,  give  me  work,  give  me  the  most  abstruse  cryptogram  or  the  most  in-
tricate analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense then 
with artiﬁ cial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine of existence. I crave for 
mental exaltation. That is why I have chosen my own particular profession, - 
or rather created it, for I am the only one in the world.’

The Sign of the Four, Arthur Conan Doyle, 1890.
No, Sherlock, you are not; you have the infectious disease physicians for company.

_OHCM_10e.indb   443

_OHCM_10e.indb   443

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
10  Neurology

Contents
Neurology at the bedside:
Where is the lesion?  446
Drugs and the nervous system  448
Cerebral blood supply  450
Testing peripheral nerves  452
Dermatomes and peripheral 

nerves  454

Some common presentations:
Headache  456
Migraine  458
Blackouts  460
Vertigo & dizziness  462
Hearing loss & tinnitus  464
Acute bilateral leg weakness 466
Abnormal involuntary movements 

(dyskinesia)  468

Diseases and conditions:
Stroke:

Clinical features and acute 

management  470

Investigation and 
prevention  472

Re-enablement after stroke  474
Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)  476
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 

(SAH)  478

Intracranial venous thrombosis 

(IVT)  480

Subdural haematoma  482
Extradural (epidural) 
haematoma  482

Delirium (acute confusional 

state)  484
Dementia  486
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)  488
Epilepsy: diagnosis  490
Epilepsy: management  492
Parkinsonism  494
Multiple sclerosis (MS)  496
Space-occupying lesions (SOL)  498
Idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension  498

Bell’s palsy  500
Mononeuropathies  502
Polyneuropathies  504
Autonomic neuropathy  505
Motor neuron disease (MND)  506
Bulbar palsy  507
Cervical spondylosis  508
Myopathy  510
Myasthenia gravis (MG)  512
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syn-

drome (LEMS)  512
Neuroﬁ bromatosis  514
Syringomyelia  516
Retroviruses and neurology  517

Fig 10.1  Sir Roger Bannister CBE ran the ﬁ rst ever 
sub-4 minute mile on 6 May 1954 at the age of 25. 
At that time he was a medical student at Oxford 
University, and graduated the following year. He 
went on to become a prominent academic neu-
rologist, conducting research into the autonomic 
nervous system, which he regarded as his great-
est achievement. Autonomic activity and running 
are,  of  course,  intimately  linked,  as  Bannister 
reﬂ ected in a more poetic manner than the usual 
‘ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight’ cliché: ‘As a child I ran barefoot 
along damp, fresh sand by the seashore. The air 
there had a special quality…. The sound of break-
ers shut out all others, and I was startled, almost 
frightened, by the tremendous excitement a few 
steps could create. It was an intense moment of 
discovery of a source of power and beauty that 
one  previously  hardly  dreamt  existed.’  In  2014, 
Bannister spoke publicly of his sense of irony at 
being diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease.

Bettmann / Bettmann collection / Getty Images.

_OHCM_10e.indb   444

_OHCM_10e.indb   444

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

445

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

I think, therefore I am
It is the brain, more than any other organ, that marks Homo sapiens apart from 
other animals. Our ability to be self-aware, to think, and to reason has formed 
the basis of scientiﬁ c inquiry and philosophical speculation for millennia, as we 
attempt  to  rationalize  and  deﬁ ne  this  cognitive  capability.  What  is  the  mind? 
Less  tangible  than  other  aspects  of  our  being,  throughout  time  humans  have 
looked to explanations from philosophy, folklore, religion, and now science. The 
concept of the sense of self and being that deﬁ nes us a¬¬—whether it be called 
the  ego,  nous,  or  the  soul—remains  intriguing  yet  elusive  to  explain.  Aristotle 
held that the psyche (Greek: ψυχή=soul) was not separate to its housing body, 
as one could not exist without the other. This view was directly contradicted by 
the 17th-century French philosopher René Descartes. He proposed the theory of 
‘mind–body dualism’ in which the mind, located in the pineal gland, is an entirely 
separate  entity  to  the  material  being,  and  controls  the  avatar  of  the  physical 
body like a puppeteer.

These conﬂ icting viewpoints well illustrate the spectrum of neurological disease 
and its blurred boundaries with psychiatry and psychology. Jean Martin Charcot 
(1825–1893), often credited as the father of neurology, appeared to be more inter-
ested in this crossover than neuronal dysfunction: he spent two decades of his 
career studying hysteria in Paris, initially attributing symptoms of crying, fainting, 
and temporary blindness to an organic, inherited cause, before revising his view 
in later life to conclude that this was a psychological disease. His controversial 
work in this ﬁ eld inspired his student Sigmund Freud’s psychoanalytical theories, 
and illustrated the very real power of the conscious, or sub-conscious, to produce 
physical symptoms, a phenomenon familiar to all physicians. Perhaps reﬂ ecting 
our frustration with this challenging area as much as his limited success, we re-
member Charcot for his more tangible outputs, for example, in giving the inau-
gural description of, among other things, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, and of course 
his eponymous misshapen joint resulting from proprioceptive loss.

However, both Aristotle and Charcot would have surely agreed with Descartes’ 
proposition of ‘cogito ergo sum’: I think, therefore I am. Whether mind and brain 
are dual or one, they are inextricably linked and the very nature of awareness 
proves its existence. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   445

_OHCM_10e.indb   445

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

446

Where is the lesion?

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

This is an important ﬁ rst question to ask and depends on recognizing characteristic 
patterns of cognitive, cranial nerve, motor, and sensory deﬁ cits. Locating a focal le-
sion can be aided by features such as asymmetry (eg one pupil dilated, one upgoing 
plantar response) or a spinal level (eff ects may be symmetrical below the lesion). 
Note that sometimes there is no single lesion, rather, a general insult causing a 
falsely localizing sign, eg abducens nerve palsy in ICP. Other generalized causes of 
speciﬁ c local eff ects are: trauma, encephalitis, anoxia, poisoning, or post-ictal states.
Patterns of loss Are crucial in locating the lesion (see BOX ‘From ﬁ ndings to neu-
roanatomy’):
Upper motor neuron (UMN): Patterns of weakness are caused by damage anywhere 
along the corticospinal (=pyramidal) tracts: pathways that carry motor information 
from the precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex up to the synapse with anterior horn 
cells in the spinal cord (via the internal capsule, brainstem, and cord).1 •UMN weakness 
aff ects groups rather than individual muscles, typically in a ‘pyramidal’ pattern: in 
the arm, extensors are predominantly aff ected; in the leg the opposite is true and 
the ﬂ exors are the weaker muscle group. •Spasticity develops in the stronger muscle 
groups (arm ﬂ exors and leg extensors). It manifests as tone that is velocity-de-
pendent, ie the faster you move the patient’s muscle, the greater the resistance, until 
it ﬁ nally gives way (like a ‘clasp-knife’).2 •Muscle wasting is less prominent. • There is 
hyperreﬂ exia: reﬂ exes are brisk. • Plantars are upgoing (+ve Babinski sign) ± clonus 
(elicited by rapidly dorsi ﬂ exing the foot; ≤3 rhythmic, downward beats of the foot are 
normal). •Loss of skilled ﬁ ne ﬁ nger move ments may be greater than expected from 
the overall grade of weakness (see BOX ‘Muscle weakness grading’). UMN lesions can 
mimic LMN lesions in the ﬁ rst few hours before spasticity and hyperreﬂ exia develop.
Lower motor neuron (LMN): Lesions are caused by damage anywhere from the ante-
rior horn cells distally, including the nerve roots, plexuses, and peripheral nerves. The 
pattern of weakness corresponds to the muscles supplied by the involved neurons. 
•Aff ected muscles show wasting ± fasciculation (spontaneous  involuntary twitching). 
•There is hypotonia/ﬂ accidity: the limb feels soft and ﬂ oppy, providing little resistance 
to passive stretch. •Reﬂ exes are reduced or absent; the plantars  remain ﬂ exor. The 
chief diff erential for LMN weakness is a primary muscle disease (p510)—but here there 
is symmetrical loss, reﬂ exes are normal or lost late, and there is no sensory component.
Mixed LMN and UMN signs: Can occur, eg in MND, B12, taboparesis (see p466).
Sensory deﬁ cits: It is important to test individual modalities and remember the 
quirks of our normal wiring: correctly interpreted, the distribution of sensory loss 
and the modality involved (pain, T°, touch, vibration, joint-position sense) will help 
reﬁ ne and increase your conﬁ dence in localizing the lesion (see BOX ‘From ﬁ ndings 
to  neuroanatomy’).  Pain  and  T°  sensations  travel  along  small  ﬁ bres  in  peripheral 
nerves  and  the  anterolateral  (spinothalamic)  tracts  in  the  cord  and  brainstem 
(p516), whereas joint-position and vibration sense travel in large ﬁ bres in peripheral 
nerves and the large dorsal columns of the cord.

Muscle weakness grading (MRC classiﬁ cation)

 • Grade 3  Active movement against gravity
 • Grade 4  Active movement against resistance
 • Grade 5  Normal power (allowing for age) 

 • Grade 0  No muscle contraction
 • Grade 1  Flicker of contraction
 • Grade 2  Some active movement
Grade 4 covers a big range: 4Ω, 4, and 4+ denote movement against slight, moder-
ate, and stronger resistance; avoid fudging descriptions—‘stren gth 4/5 through-
out’ suggests a mild quadriparesis or myopathy. It is better to document ‘poor 
eff ort’ and the maximum grade for each muscle tested. Distribution of weakness 
tells us more than grade of weakness (grade does help document improvement). 

1  Most of the ﬁ bres of the corticospinal (=pyramidal) tract decussate at the medullary pyramids, hence the 
name and the contralateral nature of symptoms. Extrapyramidal denotes damage to the basal ganglia and 
presents as parkinsonism (see p468, 494).
2  Whereas with rigidity,  tone is not velocity-dependent but constant throughout passive movement.

_OHCM_10e.indb   446

_OHCM_10e.indb   446

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

447

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

From ﬁ ndings to neuroanatomy: localizing the lesions
Cortical  lesions may cause a particularly localized problem with hand or foot 
movements, with normal or even tone—but reﬂ exes more proximally in the arm 
or leg will point to this being an UMN rather than LMN lesion. Sensory loss may be 
conﬁ ned to discriminative functions, eg stereognosis and two-point discrimina-
tion (p499). Internal capsule (p470) and corticospinal tract lesions cause con-
tralateral hemiparesis (UMN signs). There is generalized contralateral sensory loss. 
A cranial nerve palsy (III–XII) contralateral to a hemipl egia implicates the brain-
stem on the side of the cranial nerve palsy. Lateral brainstem lesions show both 
dissociated and crossed sensory loss with pain and T° loss on the side of the face 
ipsilateral to the lesion, and contralateral arm and leg sensory loss. Cord lesions 
causing paraparesis (both legs) or quadriparesis/tetra plegia (all limbs) are sug-
gested by ﬁ nding a motor and reﬂ ex level (power is unaff ected above the lesion, 
with LMN signs at the level of the lesion, and UMN signs below the lesion). A sensory 
level is the hallmark (albeit a rather unreliable one)—ie decreased sensation below 
the level of the lesion with normal sensation above. Hemi- cord lesions cause a 
Brown-Séquard picture (p696): dorsal column loss on the side of the lesion and 
contralateral spinothalamic loss. Dissociated sensory loss may occur, eg in cervi-
cal cord lesions—loss of ﬁ ne touch and proprioception without loss of pain and 
temperature (or vice versa, eg syringomyelia, p516; or cord tumours). Peripheral 
neuropathies: (p502.) Most cause distal weakness, eg foot-drop; weak hand (note: 
although Guillain–Barré syndrome typically presents as distal weakness that as-
cends over time, some atypical forms of Guillain–Barré syndrome may present 
with proximal weakness due to nerve root involvement). Sensory loss is typically 
worse distally (may involve all sensory modalities or be selective, depending on 
nerve ﬁ bre size involved). Involvement of a single nerve (mononeuropathy) occurs 
with trauma or entrapment (carpal tunnel, p503); invol vement of several nerves 
(mononeuritis multiplex) is seen, eg in  DM or vasculitis. Sensory loss from indi-
vidual nerve lesions will follow anatomical territories (dermatomes, p454), which 
are usually more sharply deﬁ ned than those of root lesions.

Also ask
What is the lesion? Are the cells diseased, dysfunctional, disconnected (after a 
stroke), or under- or overexcited (migraine; epilepsy)? Is there loss of a speciﬁ c type 
of nerve cell, as in MND or subacute com bined degeneration of the cord (B12, p334). 
Arteriopaths get strokes, tropical travellers get wormy lesions.
Why? Is there a systemic disease causing the neurology? Eg atrial ﬁ brillation 
allowing an embolus to form, which then lodges in the patient’s dominant hemi-
sphere,  causing  an  infarct  that  presents  with  dysphasia.  Do  a  full  systems  ex-
amination and always beware the irregularly irregular pulse.

_OHCM_10e.indb   447

_OHCM_10e.indb   447

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

448

Drugs and the nervous system

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

The brain is a gland that secretes both thoughts and molecules: both products are 
modulated by neurotransmitter systems. Some target sites for drugs:
1      Precursor of the transmitter (eg levodopa).
2      Interference with the storage of transmitter in vesicles within the pre-synaptic 

neuron (eg tetrabenazine).

3      Binding to the post-synaptic receptor site (eg bromocriptine).
4      Binding to the receptor-modulating site (eg benzodiazepines).
5      Interference with the breakdown of neurotransmitter within the synaptic cleft 

(eg acetylcholinesterase inhibitors; monoamine oxidase inhibitors—MAOIS).

6      Reduce reuptake of transmitter from synaptic cleft into pre-synaptic cell (eg 
selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors—SSRIS,  eg  ﬂ uoxetine;  or  serotonin  and 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors—SNRIS, eg mirtazapine).

7      Binding to pre-synaptic autoreceptors (eg pindolol, a -blocker with partial 5HT au-
toreceptor antagonist eff ects, can be used to augment antidep ressant therapy).
Important neurotransmitters (and some associated drugs) are listed in table 10.1.

Storms on the sea of neurotransmission
The complex and subtle mixture of chemicals that bathes our hundreds of trillions 
of synapses has been likened to a ‘sea’ of neurotransmitters. If so, it is surely a 
seascape of exquisite beauty, no matter how disturbed cognition may become by 
the storms that whip the waves on the surface. A well-chosen prescription may 
off er a lifeboat from such storms, but before prescribing any drug that modu-
lates neurotransmission, consider that you are about to release a blunt and poorly 
understood force into a delicate environment. • The drug (or a metabolite) must 
be able to pass through the blood–brain barrier to have an eff ect. •The conse-
quences of any sedative eff ects may be severe. • There will be short- and long-
term SEs (eg tardive dyskinesia with neuroleptic drugs). • Most drugs aff ect many 
neuro transmitters, increasing therapeutic scope (and uncertainty) eg risperidone 
(blocks D2, 5HT2,  1 and  2 receptors). • Metabolites of drugs may have equal or more 
important pharmacological eff ects resulting in clinically important interactions 
with drugs aff ecting eg hepatic metabolism. • One neurotrans mitter may have 
many eff ects, eg dopaminergic neurons go awry in Parkinson’s disease, schizo-
phrenia, and addiction to drugs and gambling, by aff ecting motor control, motiva-
tion, eff ort, reward, analgesia, stress, learning, attention, and cognition.

_OHCM_10e.indb   448

_OHCM_10e.indb   448

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

449

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Table 10.1  Major neurotransmitters and associated drugs
Drugs increasing activity (≈ agonists) Drugs decreasing activity (≈ antagonists)
Dopamine Acts on receptors D1–5; aff ects mood and reward-seeking behaviour.
Pramipexole, ropinirole, levodopa, 
apomorphine (Parkinson’s*)
Cabergoline (hyperprolactin aemia; 
acromegaly). 

Chlorpromazine (schizophrenia, OHCS p340)
Metoclopramide (nausea)
Inhibition of dopamine signalling may lead to 
drug induced parkinsonism.

Ondansetron (nausea)
Mirtazapine (depression)
Olanzapine, clozapine (schizophrenia)

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5HT) Many receptor types 5HT1–7; multiple eff ects.
Lithium (mood stabilizer)
Sumatriptan (migraine)
Buspirone (partial agonist; anxiety)
Fluoxetine, sertraline (reuptake inhibi-
tors; depression). 
Amino acids Glutamate and aspartate act as excitatory transmitters on NMDA and 
non-NMDA receptors—relevant in epilepsy and CNS ischaemia. -amino butyric acid (GABA) 
is mostly inhibitory.
Gabapentin, valproate (GABA agonists; 
epilepsy and neuropathic pain)
Benzodiazepines (GABA agonists; seda-
tion)
Baclofen (GABA agonists; spasticity)
Alcohol (GABA agonist)†
Acetylcholine Multiple receptors classed into muscarinic and nicotinic types. Peripher-
al agonists used in glaucoma (pilocarpine); myasthenia (anticholinesterases). Peripheral 
antagonists used in asthma (ipratropium); incont inence; to dry secretions pre-op; to 
dilate pupils; to  heart rate (atropine). Centrally acting drugs include:
Donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine 
(acetylcholinesterase inhibitors; 
dementia)
Histamine and purines (eg ATP)

Procyclidine, trihexyphenidyl (drug-induced 
parkinsonism)

Memantine (glutamate antagonist; 
dementia)

Cyclizine (antihistamine; nausea)
Purinergic receptor blockers (emerging role in 
chronic pain).

Aprepitant (chemotherapy-related nausea 
by blocking substance P receptors).

Neuropeptides Multiple and growing list; includes opioids and substance P
Exogenous opioids (wide-ranging anal-
gesic and mood-related eff ects).
Noradrenaline, adrenaline (=norepinephrine, epinephrine) 4 rec eptor types: 1–2, 1–2. 
Noradrenaline is more speciﬁ c for -receptors but both transmitters aff ect all receptors. 
In the periphery, -receptors drive arteriolar vasoconstriction and pupillary dilation; 1 
stimulation leads to  pulse and myocardial contractility; 2 stimulation leads to bronchodi-
latation, uterine relaxation, and arteriolar vasodilation. Centrally acting drugs include:
Clonidine (refractory hypertension)
Tricyclic antidepressants and venlafax-
ine (5HT and noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors; depression)
MAOIs
*Agonism at D3 receptor agonists may cause pathological behavioural patterns, eg hypersexuality, patho-
logical gambling or hobbying, and disorders of impulse control in people having no history of these.
†In chronic alcohol use, GABA receptors are downregulated; acamprosate, used in alcoholism, may help to 
maintain GABA signalling after alcohol withdrawal.

_OHCM_10e.indb   449

_OHCM_10e.indb   449

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

450

Cerebral blood supply

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Knowledge  of  the  anatomy  of  the  blood  supply  of  the  brain  helps  diagnosis  and 
management of cerebrovascular disease (pp470–8). Always try to identify the area 
of brain that correlates with a patient’s symptoms and identify the aff ected artery.
Internal carotid arteries Supply the majority of blood to the anterior two-thirds of 
the cerebral hemispheres and the basal ganglia (via the lenticulo striate arteries). At 
worst, internal carotid artery occlusion causes fatal total  infarction of these areas. 
More often, the picture is like middle cerebral artery occlusion (see later in topic).
The circle of Willis (ﬁ g 10.2) An anastomotic ring at the base of the brain fed by the 
three arteries that supply the brain with blood: the internal carotids (anteriorly) and 
the basilar artery (posteriorly, formed by the joining of     the vertebral arteries, which 
supply the brainstem). This arrangement may compensate for the eff ects of occlusion 
of a feeder vessel by allowing supply from unaff ected vessels; however, the anatomy of 
the circle of Willis is variable and in many people it does not provide much protection.
Cerebral  arteries  Three  pairs  of  arteries  leave  the  circle  of  Willis  to  supply  the 
cerebral hemispheres: the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries (ﬁ gs 10.2, 
10.3). The anterior and middle cerebrals are branches of the internal carotid arteries; 
in 80%, the basilar artery divides into the two posterior cerebral arteries. Ischaemia 
from occlusion of any one of them may be lessened by retrograde supply from lep-
tomeningeal vessels.
Anterior  cerebral  artery:  (ﬁ g  10.2)  Supplies  the  frontal  and  medial  part  of  the 
cerebrum. Occlusion may cause a weak, numb contralateral leg ± similar, if milder, 
arm symptoms. The face is spared. Bilateral infarction is a rare cause of paraplegia 
and an even rarer cause of akinetic mutism.
Middle cerebral artery: (ﬁ g 10.2) Supplies the lateral part of each hemisphere. Oc-
clusion may cause contralateral hemiparesis, hemisensory loss (esp. face and arm), 
contralateral  homonymous  hemianopia  due  to  involvement  of  the  optic  radiation, 
cognitive change including dysphasia with dominant hemisphere lesions, and visuo-
spatial disturbance (eg cannot dress; gets lost) with non-dominant lesions.
Posterior  cerebral  artery:  (ﬁ gs  10.2,  10.4)  Supplies  the  occipital  lobe.  Occlusion 
gives contralateral homon ymous hemianopia (often with macula sparing).
Vertebrobasilar  circulation  Supplies  the  cerebellum,  brainstem,  occipital  lobes; 
occlusion  causes  signs  relating  to  any  or  all  three:  hemianopia;  cortical  blindness; 
diplopia;  vertigo;  nystagmus;  ataxia;  dysarthria;  dysphasia;  hemi-  or  quadriplegia; 
unilat eral or bilateral sensory symptoms; hiccups; coma. Infarctions of the brain stem 
can produce various syndromes, eg lateral medullary syndrome, in which occlusion 
of one vertebral artery or the posterior inferior cereb ellar artery causes infarction of 
the lateral medulla and the inferior cerebellar surface ( vertigo, vomiting, dysphagia, 
nystagmus, ipsilateral ataxia, soft palate paralysis, ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, and 
a crossed pattern sensory loss—analgesia to pin-prick on ipsilateral face and contra-
lateral trunk and limbs). Locked-in syndrome is caused by damage to the ventral pons 
due to pontine artery occlusion. Patients are unable to move, but retain full cognition 
and awareness, communicating by blinking, electronic boards, or special computers. 
Right-to-die legislation may be invoked...as one suff erer blinked: ‘My life is dull, miser-
able, demeaning, undigniﬁ ed, and intolerable.’ Locked-in syndrome is diff erent from 
other right-to-die conditions because patients need someone to do the act for them.
Subclavian steal syndrome: Subclavian artery stenosis proximal to the origin of 
the vertebral artery may cause blood to be stolen by retrograde ﬂ ow down this 
vertebral artery down into the arm, causing brainstem ischaemia typically after use 
of the arm. Suspect if the BP in each arm diff ers by >20mmHg.

‘Dizzy-plus’ syndromes and arterial events
  • SCA dizzy
  • AICAdizzy and deaf
  • PICAdizzy and dysphagic and dysphonic.

_OHCM_10e.indb   450

_OHCM_10e.indb   450

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Optic chiasm

Internal
carotid artery

Anterior cerebral artery

Anterior communicating artery
Middle cerebral artery

451

Superior 
cerebellar
artery

Pontine
arteries

Basilar
artery

Vertebral
artery

Anterior
spinal artery

Posterior communicating artery

Posterior cerebral artery

Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery

Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery (PICA)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.2  The circle of Willis at the base of the brain. See also ﬁ gs 10.17, 10.18. 

Fig 10.3  Berry aneurysm at junction of 
posterior  communicating  artery  with 
internal carotid (p478). ©Dr D Hamoundi.

Fig 10.4  CT of stroke in posterior cer-
ebral artery territory. 
©J Trobe.

Thomas Willis 
Thomas Willis (1621–1675) is one of those happy Oxford heroes who hold a bogus 
DM degree, awarded in 1646 for his Royalist sympathies while at Christ Church, 
the  most  loyally  royal  college  in  the  University.  He  had  a  busy  life  inventing 
terms such as ‘neurology’ and ‘reﬂ ex’. Not only has his name been given to his 
famous  circle,  but  he  was  the  ﬁ rst  to  describe  myasthenia  gravis,  whooping 
cough, and the sweet taste of diabetic urine. He was the ﬁ rst person (few have 
followed him) to know the course of the spinal accessory nerve. He is unusual 
among Oxford neurologists in that he developed the practice of giving his lunch 
away  to  the  poor.  He  also  espoused  iatrochemistry:  a  theory  of  medicine  ac-
cording to which all morbid conditions of the body can be explained by distur-
bances in the fermentations and eff ervescences of its humours.

_OHCM_10e.indb   451

_OHCM_10e.indb   451

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

452

Testing peripheral nerves

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

While there is some anatomical variation between individuals in ascribing particular 
nerve roots to muscles, tables 10.2–10.4 represent a reasonable compromise. Der-
matomes and sensory nerve roots are shown in ﬁ gs 10.5-10.9, pp454-5.

Remember to test proximal muscle power: ask the patient to sit from lying, to pull 

you towards him/herself, and to rise from squatting (if reasonably ﬁ t).
Observe walking—easy to forget, even if the complaint is of diffi  culty walking!
Don’t be caught out by weakness secondary to musculoskeletal pathology—the 
traditional neurological examination relies on the musculoskeletal system being 
intact. Ruptured tendons and fractures may mimic focal neurological lesions (espe-
cially in patients who can’t give a clear history).
Table 10.2  Assessment of peripheral nerve function in the lower limb

Nerve root Muscle
Femoral nerve 

L1, 2, 3

Iliopsoas (also supplied via
L1, 2, & 3 spinal nerves)

L2, 3, 4

Quadriceps femoris

Obturator nerve

L2, 3, 4
Inferior gluteal nerve

Hip adductors

L5, S1, S2

Gluteus maximus

Test by asking the patient to:

Flex hip against resistance with knee 
ﬂ exed and lower leg supported: patient 
lies on back
Extend at knee against resist ance. Start 
with knee ﬂ exed

Adduct leg against resistance

Hip extension (‘bury heel into the
couch’)—with knee in extension

Superior gluteal nerve 
L4, 5, S1

Gluteus medius and minimus Abduction and internal hip rotation

with leg ﬂ exed at hip and knee

Sciatic and common peroneal* nerves; sciatic and tibial** nerves
*L4, 5
*L5, S1
*L5, S1
*L5, S1
*L5, S1
(*)L5, S1, 2

Dorsiﬂ ex ankle
Dorsiﬂ ex toes against resistance
Dorsiﬂ ex hallux against resistance
Evert foot against resistance
Dorsiﬂ ex proximal phalanges of toes
Flex knee against resistance

Tibialis anterior
Extensor digitorum longus
Extensor hallucis longus
Peroneus longus and brevis
Extensor digitorum brevis
Hamstrings (short head of 
biceps femoris is from the 
common peroneal nerve)
Tibialis posterior
Gastrocnemius
Flexor digitorum longus
Small muscles of foot

**L4, 5
**S1, 2
**L5, S1, 2
**S1, 2

Invert plantarﬂ exed foot
Plantarﬂ ex ankle or stand on tiptoe
Flex terminal joints of toes
Make the sole of the foot into a cup

Table 10.3  Rapid screening tests for peripheral nerve roots

Shoulder

Elbow

Wrist

Fingers

Abduction
Adduction
Flexion
Extension
Flexion
Extension
Flexion
Extension 
Abduction

C5
C5–C7
C5–C6
C7
C7–8
C7
C8
C7
T1

Hip

Knee

Ankle

Toe

Flexion
Adduction
Extension
Flexion
Extension
Dorsiﬂ exion
Eversion
Plantarﬂ exion
Big toe extension

L1–L2
L2–3
L5–S1
L5–S1
L3–L4
L4
L5–S1
S1–S2
L5

_OHCM_10e.indb   452

_OHCM_10e.indb   452

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

453

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Table 10.4  Assessment of peripheral nerve function in the upper limb
Nerve root Muscle

C3, 4

C5, 6, 7

C5, 6

C6, 7, 8

C5, 6

C5, 6

Trapezius
Serratus anterior

Pectoralis major (P major) 
clavicular head
P major sternocostal head
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus

C5, 6

C6, 7, 8

Latissimus dorsi
Biceps
Deltoid
C5, 6
Radial nerve (p502)
Triceps
Brachioradialis

C6, 7, 8

C5, 6

C5, 6

C6, 7

C7, 8

C7, 8

C7, 8

C7, 8

Extensor carpi radialis longus
Supinator
Extensor digitorum
Extensor carpi ulnaris
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor pollicis brevis
Extensor pollicis longus

C7, 8
Median nerve (p502)

C6, 7

C6, 7

C7, 8, T1

C7, 8

C7, 8, T1

C8, T1

C8, T1

C8, T1

Pronator teres
Flexor carpi radialis
Flexor digitorum superﬁ cialis

Flexor digitorum
profundus I & II
Flexor pollicis longus

Abductor pollicis brevis
Opponens pollicis

1st lumbrical/interosseus 
(median and ulnar nerves)

Ulnar nerve (p502)

C7, 8, T1

C7, C8

C8, T1

Flexor carpi ulnaris
Flexor digitorum profundus 
III & IV
Dorsal interossei

C8, T1

Palmar interossei

C8, T1

C8, T1

C8, T1

Adductor pollicis
Abductor digiti minimi
Flexor digiti minimi

Test by asking the patient to:
Shrug shoulder (via accessory nerve)
Push arm forward against resistance; 
look for scapula winging (p511) if weak
Adduct arm from above horizontal, 
and push it forward
Adduct arm below horizontal
Abduct arm the ﬁ rst 15°
Externally rotate semi-ﬂ exed arm, 
elbow at side
Adduct arm from horizontal position
Flex supinated forearm
Abduct arm between 15° and 90°

Extend elbow against resistance
Flex elbow with forearm half way 
between pronation and supination
Extend wrist to radial side
Arm by side, resist hand pronation
Keep ﬁ ngers extended at MCP joint
Extend wrist to ulnar side
Abduct thumb at 90° to palm
Extend thumb at MCP joint
Resist thumb ﬂ exion at IP joint

Keep arm pronated against resistance
Flex wrist towards radial side
Resist extension at PIP joint (with prox -
imal phalanx ﬁ xed by the examiner)
Resist extension at index DIP joint of 
index ﬁ nger
Resist thumb extension at interphalan-
geal joint (ﬁ x proximal phalanx)
Abduct thumb (nail at 90° to palm)
Thumb touches base of 5th ﬁ ngertip 
(nail parallel to palm)
Extend PIP joint against resistance 
with MCP joint held hyperextended

Flex wrist to ulnar side; observe tendon
Resist extension of distal phalanx of 5th 
ﬁ nger while you ﬁ x its middle phalanx
Finger abduction: cannot cross the 
middle over the index ﬁ nger (tests 
index ﬁ nger adduction too)
Finger adduction: pull apart a sheet of 
paper held between middle and ring 
ﬁ nger DIP joints of both hands; the 
paper moves on the weaker side*  
Adduct thumb (nail at 90° to palm)
Abduct little ﬁ nger
Flex little ﬁ nger at MCP joint

*Also, metacarpophalangeal joint ﬂ exion may be more on the aff ected side as ﬂ exor tendons are 
recruited—the basis of Froment’s paper sign. Wartenberg’s sign is persistent little ﬁ nger abduction.

_OHCM_10e.indb   453

_OHCM_10e.indb   453

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

454

Dermatomes and peripheral nerves

Trigeminal

Ophthalmic division
Maxillary division
Mandibular division

Great auricular, C2, C3

Cervical plexus,
superﬁcial branches

Intercostal nerves
T2–T11

Lateral cutaneous br.
Anterior cutaneous br.

Axillary
Intercostobrachial
Medial cutaneous
Musculocutaneous

Brachial
plexus

Radial

Posterior
cutaneous
Superﬁcial 
branch

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Median

Ulnar

Lumbar
plexus

Ilioinguinal
Genitofemoral
Lateral cutaneous

Femoral

Anterior
cutaneous
rami

Saphenous

Lateral cutaneous
nerve of calf

V2

V3

C4

V1

C3

T2
T3

T5

T4

T6

T7

T8

T9
T10 T11

T12

L1

C5

T1

C6 & C7

C7

L2

L3

L4

L5

Sacral
plexus Sciatic

Superﬁcial and
deep peroneal

S1

Sural

Medial plantar

Fig 10.5  The white areas denote terra incognita: considerable inter-individual variation exists, 
and no single best option can be given.

Aim to keep a few key dermatomes up 
your sleeve (C5–T2)
C3–4
C6–7
T1

Clavicles
Lateral arm/forearm
Medial side of arm
Thumb
Middle ﬁ nger
Little ﬁ nger
Nipples
Umbilicus
Inguinal ligament
Anterior and inner leg
Medial side of big toe
Posterior and outer leg
Lateral margin of foot and 
little toe
Perineum 

Rough approximations!

C6

C7

C8

T4

T10

L1
L2–3
L5
L5, S1–2

S1

S2–4

Fig  10.6  Pain  in  a  dermatomal  dis-
tribution  suggests  a  problem  with  a 
cranial nerve or dorsal root ganglion 
(radicul opathy)—where  the  cell  bod-
ies of sensory ﬁ bres live.  What is the 
dermatome? What is the lesion? See 
p404 for the answer.

_OHCM_10e.indb   454

_OHCM_10e.indb   454

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

C2

C3

C4

T5

T2

T3

T4

T6
T7
T8

T9
T10
T11

T12
L1

L2
L3

L3

S2

L4

C5

C7

T1

S3
S4
S5

S1

S1

C6 & C7

C8

Fig 10.7  Posterior view.

T12

L1

S2

S2

S5

S4

S3

S1

Trigeminal

Superﬁcial
cervical plexus

Ophthalmic division
Maxillary division
Mandibular division

Dorsal
branches

Mastoid branch, C2, C3 
Great auricular branch, C2, C3
Occipital, C2
Occipital, C3
Occipital, C4
Occipital, C5–C8
Supraclavicular, C3, C4 
Dorsal rami of thoracic nerves 
Cutaneous branch of axillary
Lateral cutaneous branches
of intercostal nerves 

Medial and lateral cutaneous br. of radial 

Medial cutaneous
Intercostobrachial 

Musculocutaneous 

Superﬁcial branch of radial

455

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Gluteal branch of 12th intercostal 
Lateral cutaneous br. of iliohypogastric 
Lateral branches of dorsal
lumbar and sacral rami
Medial branches of dorsal rami, L.1–S.6 

Perforating branch of
posterior cutaneous

Pudendal
plexus

Lateral cutaneous 
Obturator
Medial cutaneous
Saphenous

Posterior cutaneous 
Superﬁcial peroneal
Sural
Tibial 
Lateral plantar

Lumbar
plexus 

Femoral

Common
peroneal

Sacral
plexus 

Cutaneous innervation
of the foot

Saphenous nerve
Deep peroneal nerve

Superﬁcial peroneal nerve

Medial plantar nerve

Lateral plantar nerve

Calcaneal branch
(tibial nerve)

1
2

3

4

5

6

Sural nerve

7

Dorsal
surface

Plantar
surface

1

2

3

7

5

7

4

6

Superﬁcial branch of radial

Palmar
surface

Dorsal
surface

Median

Ulnar

Fig 10.8  The anterior ⅓ of the scrotum is 
L1; the posterior ⅔ is S3. The penis is S2/3 
(L1 at its root).

Dorsal cutaneous branch of ulnar
Fig 10.9  Feet and hands.

Median

_OHCM_10e.indb   455

_OHCM_10e.indb   455

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

456

Headache

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Every day, thousands of people visit the doctor complaining of headache. Tension 
headaches are the most common, but beware the disabling and treatable (migraine, 
cluster headache), and the sinister (space-occupying lesions, meningitis, subarach-
noid haemorrhage). A good history is the key. Ask about:
Onset Rapid onset headaches are concerning; the key diagnosis to rule out here 
is •subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH, p478), sudden-onset, ‘worst ever’ headache, 
often  occipital,  stiff   neck,  focal  signs,  consciousness.  Other  diff erentials  include: 
•Meningitis  (p822):  fever,  photophobia,  stiff   neck,  purpuric  rash,  coma.  May  be 
associated with neck stiff ness (≈ meningeal irritation). Do an  LP, start antibiotics. 
•Encephalitis  (p824):  fever,  odd  behaviour,  ﬁ ts,  or  reduced  consciousness.  Do  an 
urgent CT head and LP to look for signs of infection. •Post-coital headache.
Subacute/gradual onset headaches: •Venous sinus thrombosis (p480): subacute 
headache, papilloedema. •Sinusitis: dull, constant ache over frontal or maxillary si-
nuses, with tenderness ± postnasal drip. Pain is worse on bending over. Ethmoid or 
sphenoid sinus pain is felt deep in the midline at the root of the nose. Common with 
coryza (p406). The pain lasts ~1–2 wks. CT can conﬁ rm diagnosis but is rarely needed. 
•Tropical illness: eg malaria: travel history, ﬂ u-like illness (p416); typhus (p415). •In-
tracranial hypotension: CSF leakage, eg iatrogenic after LP or epidural anaesthesia. 
Suspect if headaches worse on standing.; treat with epidural blood patch over leak, 
if conservative management with IV ﬂ uids and caff eine fails.
Character Tight band? Think tension headache (the usual cause of bilateral, non-
pulsatile  headache  ±  scalp  muscle  tenderness).  Throbbing/pulsatile/lateralizing? 
Think migraine (p458).
Frequency Headaches that recur tend to be benign: • Migraine: p458. • Cluster 
headache: (see  BOX ‘Cluster headache’) • Trigeminal neuralgia: (see BOX ‘Trigemi-
nal  neuralgia’)  •  Recurrent  (Moll aret’s)  meningitis:  suspect  if  fever/meningism 
with  each  headache.  Send  CSF  for  herpes  simplex  PCR  (HSV2).  Is  there  access  to 
subarachnoid spaces via a skull fracture, or a recurring cause of aseptic meningitis 
(SLE, eg abducens nerve palsy, Behçet’s, sarcoid)?
Duration  Chronic,  progressive  headaches  can  indicate   ICP.  Typically  worse  on 
waking,  lying,  bending  forward,  or  coughing.  Also:  vomiting,  papilloedema,  sei-
zures,  false  localizing  signs,  or  odd  behaviour.  Do  imaging  to  exclude  a  space-
occupying  lesion,  and  consider  idiopathic  intracranial  hypertension.  LP  is 
contraindicated until after imaging.
Associated  features  Eye  pain  ±  reduced  vision:  Think  acute  glaucoma.  Typically 
elderly,  long-sighted  people.  Constant  pain  develops  rapidly  around  one  eye,  radiat-
ing to the forehead with markedly reduced vision, visual haloes, and a red, congested 
eye (p561). Seek expert help at once. If delay in treatment of >1h is likely, give eye 
drops (eg 0.5% timolol maleate ± 2% pilocarpine) and acetazolamide 500mg PO. Jaw 
claudication tender with thickened, pulseless temporal arteries: Giant cell arteritis: 
(p556) Subacute-onset headache with ESR >40mm/h. Exclude in all >50yrs old with a 
headache that has lasted a few weeks: prompt diagnosis and steroids avoid blindness.
Precipitating causes Head trauma: Commonly causes localized pain but can be 
more  generalized.  It  lasts  ~2wks;  often  resistant  to  analgesia.  Do  CT  to  exclude 
subdural or extradural haemorrhage if drowsiness ± lucid interval, or focal signs 
(p482). Also ask about: Analgesia, sex, food (eg chocolate, cheese, coff ee).
Red ﬂ ags See p780.
Drug history Exclude medication overuse (analgesic rebound) headache: Culprits 
are mixed analgesics (paracetamol + codeine/opiates), ergotamine, and triptans. This 
is a common reason for episodic headache becoming chronic daily headache. Anal-
gesia must be withdrawn—aspirin or naproxen may mollify the rebound headache. 
A  preventive  may  help  once  off   other  drugs  (eg  tricyclics,  valproate,   gabapentin; 
p504). Limit use of over-the-counter analgesia (no more than 6d per month).
Social history Ask about stress or recent life events; may not explain the pathol-
ogy, but will help you appreciate the context in which symptoms are experienced.

_OHCM_10e.indb   456

_OHCM_10e.indb   456

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

457

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Cluster headache
Cluster headache may be the most disabling of the primary headache disorders. 
The cause (unknown : ≥5:1; onset at any age; com moner in smokers).
Symptoms Rapid-onset of excruciating pain around one eye that may become 
watery and bloodshot with lid swelling, lacrimation, facial ﬂ ushing, rhinorrhoea, 
miosis ± ptosis (20% of attacks). Pain is strictly unilateral and almost always af-
fects the same side. It lasts 15–180min, occurs once or twice a day, and is often 
nocturnal. Clusters last 4–12wks and are followed by pain-free periods of months 
or even 1–2yrs before the next cluster. Sometimes it is chronic, not episodic.
Treatment Acute attack: ‘Keep calm ... carry oxygen’: give 100% O2 for ~15min via 
non-rebreathable mask (not if COPD);  sumatriptan SC 6mg at onset (or zolmitriptan 
nasal spray 5mg).
Preventives Avoid triggers: Eg alcohol. Medication: Consider: corticosteroids 
(short term only; many SE); verapamil 360mg, lithium 900mg (monitor carefully).

Trigeminal neuralgia
Symptoms: Paroxysms of intense, stabbing pain, lasting seconds, in the trigemi-
nal nerve distribution. It is unilateral, typically aff ecting mandibular or maxillary 
div isions. The face screws up with pain (hence tic douloureux). Triggers: Wash-
ing aff ec ted area, shaving, eating, talking, dental prostheses. Typical patient:  
>50yrs old; in Asians : ≈ 2:1. Secondary causes: Compres sion of the trigemi-
nal root by anomalous or aneurysmal intracranial vessels or a tumour, chronic 
meningeal inﬂ am mation, MS, zoster, skull base malformation (eg Chiari). MRI: Is 
necessary to exclude secondary causes (~14% of cases). : Carba mazepine (start 
at 100mg/12h  PO; max 400mg/6h; lamotrigine; phenytoin 200–400mg/24h  PO; or 
gabapentin (p504). If drugs fail, surgery may be necessary. This may be directed 
at the peripheral nerve, the trigeminal ganglion, or the nerve root. Microvascular 
decompression: Anomalous vessels are separated from the trigem inal root. Ste-
reotactic gamma knife surgery can work, but length of pain relief and the time to 
treatment response are limiting factors. Facial pain  : p65.

_OHCM_10e.indb   457

_OHCM_10e.indb   457

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

458

Migraine

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

15% of us suff er from migraines, (:  3:1); the economic costs extend to £billions/yr.
Symptoms Classically: •Visual or other aura (see below) lasting 15–30min followed 
within 1h by unilateral, throbbing headache. Or: •Isolated aura with no headache; 
•Epi sodic severe headaches without aura, often premenstrual, usually unilateral, with 
nausea, vomiting ± photophobia/phono phobia (‘common migraine’). There may be 
allodynia—all stimuli produce pain: ‘I can’t brush my hair, wear earrings or glasses, 
or shave, it’s so pain ful.’ Prodrome: Precedes headache by hours/days: yawning, crav-
ings, mood/sleep change. Aura: • Visual: chaotic distorting, ‘melting’ and jumbling of 
lines, dots, or zigzags, scotomata or hemianopia; • Somatosensory: paraesthesiae 
spreading from ﬁ ngers to face; • Motor: dysarthria and ataxia (basilar migraine), 
ophthalmoplegia, or hemiparesis; • Speech: (8% of auras) dysphasia or paraphasia.
Partial  triggers  Seen  in  50%:  CHOCOLATE  or:  chocolate,  hangovers,  orgasms, 
cheese/caff eine, oral contraceptives, lie-ins, alcohol, travel, or exercise.
Associations Obesity, family history.
Diagnosis Clinical, based on the history. Diagnostic criteria if no aura: ≥5 head-
aches lasting 4–72h + nausea/vomiting (or photo/phonophobia) + any 2 of: • Unilateral 
• Pulsating • Impairs (or worsened by) routine activity.
Diff  erentials Cluster or tension headache, cervical spondylosis, BP, intracranial pa-
thology, sinusitis/otitis media, dental caries. TIAS may mimic migraine aura.
Management Avoid identiﬁ ed triggers and ensure analgesic rebound headache 
is not complicating matters (p456). Prophylactic  treatment: Can achieve ~50% 
in attack frequency in most patients; consider after risks and beneﬁ ts discussion. 
1st line: Propranolol 40–120mg/12h or topiramate 25–50mg/12h (teratogenic, can in-
terfere with Pill effi  cacy). Amitriptyline 10–75mg nocte can be used, though this is 
off -licence. Patients may be on previously-recommended prophylactic agents (eg 
valproate,  pizotifen,  pregabalin  or  ACE-i):  if  achieving  good  control  then  continue 
as required. 12-weekly botulinum toxin type A injections are a last resort in chronic 
migraine.  Treatment during an attack: NICE recommends an oral triptan (or nasal 
in 12–17y) combined with either an NSAID or paracetamol.1 Monotherapy with any of 
the above (or aspirin 900mg) can also be considered. Anti-emetics may help even in 
the abscence of nausea and vomiting. Triptans are CI if IHD, coronary spasm, uncon-
trolled  BP, recent lithium, SSRIS, or ergot use. Rare SE: arrhythmias or angina ± MI, 
even if no pre-existing risk. Non-pharmacological therapies: Warm or cold packs to 
the head, or rebreathing into paper bag (PaCO2) may help abort attacks. Butterbur 
extracts or riboﬂ avin  supplementation may have a role. NICE recommend 10 sessions 
of acupuncture over 5–8 weeks if both topiramate and propranolol are unsuitable or 
ineff ective. Transcutaneous nerve stimulation may help.
Considerations in females Incidence of migraine (especially with aura) + ischae-
mic stroke is increased by use of a combined OCP. Use progesterone-only or non-
hormonal contraception in migraine + aura, though a low dose combined OCP can 
be used in those without aura. Further risk: • Smoking • Age >35yrs • BP • Obesity 
(body mass index >30) • Diabetes mellitus • Hyperlipidaemia • Family history of arte-
riopathy <45yrs. Warn patients to stop OCP at once if they develop aura or worsen-
ing migraine; see OHCS p301. Perimenstrual migraine: If uncontrolled with standard 
treatment  and  the  onset  of  headache  is  predictable  then  consider  frovatriptan 
2.5mg BD or zolmitriptan 2.5mg BD/TDS on the days migraine is expected. Pregnancy: 
Migraine often improves; if not, get help—worsening headaches in pregnancy are 
associated with a greater risk of pre-eclampsia and cardiovascular complications. 
Off er paracetamol 1st line. Triptans and NSAIDs can be used but discuss risks and 
beneﬁ ts with patients ﬁ rst. Don’t use aspirin if breastfeeding. Anti-emetic: cyclizine 
or promethazine. Prophylaxis: seek specialist advice. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   458

_OHCM_10e.indb   458

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

What is going on in migraine? 
Despite  the  high  prevalence  of  migraines,  the  underlying  pathophysiology  is 
poorly understood. The previously favoured theory of dilatation of cerebral and 
meningeal arteries has been largely disproven, so what is the cause? • MRI dur-
ing attacks shows episodic cerebral oedema, dilatation of intra cerebral vessels, 
and   water  diff usion  not  respecting  vascular  territories,  so  the  primary  event 
may be neurological.  • PET suggests migraine is a subcortical disorder aff ecting 
the modulation of sensory processing • Magneto-encephalographic (MEG) stud-
ies have shown resting (interictal) hyperexcitability at least in the visual cortex, 
suggesting a failure of inhibitory circuits. • Hormones play a role: the incidence of 
migraine in both pre-pubertal and post-menopausal women is equal to men, yet 
increases to 3:1 during reproductive years, with 50% of females reporting syn-
chrony of migraines with the menstrual cycle. • Elevated levels of 5-HT metabo-
lites in the urine of patients during migraine attacks was ﬁ rst reported in 1972, 
and while its exact signiﬁ cance is controversial, the effi  cacy of triptans (5HT1B/1D 
agonists) support its role in migraine. • Triptans also inhibit release of substance P 
and pro-inﬂ ammatory neuropeptides, blocking transmission from the trigeminal 
nerve and implicating trigeminal nerve dysfunction.

459

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

The bigger picture
Vincent  Van  Gogh 
suf-
fered  from  ‘sick  headaches’, 
widely believed to have been 
migraines.  Could  his  swirl-
ing,  cascading  starry  night 
(ﬁ g  10.10)  be  a  visual  aura? 
Just  as  with  the  fragile 
mental  health  of  Van  Gogh, 
co-exists 
migraine  often 
with  other  chronic  condi-
tions—and 
the  combined 
negative  impact  on  physi-
cal  and  mental  health  is 
immense.  Don’t  treat  each 
disease  in  isolation.  Rather, 
attempt  to  restore  a  good 
relationship  with  the  self—
and the recovery of the pur-
pose of life through dialogue. This is the hardest but the most rewarding task, 
and may save some ears. 

World History Archive/Ann Ronan Collection / Age 
Fotostock

Fig 10.10  ‘The Starry Night’ Vincent Van Gogh 1889

_OHCM_10e.indb   459

_OHCM_10e.indb   459

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

460

Blackouts

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Causes of collapse ± loss of consciousness (LOC) are many; take a careful history (BOX).
Vasovagal (neurocardiogenic) syncope Occurs due to reﬂ ex bradycardia ± pe-
ripheral  vasodilation  provoked  by  emotion,  pain,  or  standing  too  long  (it  cannot 
occur when lying down). Onset is over seconds (not instantaneous), and is often pre-
ceded by pre-syncopal symptoms, eg nausea, pallor, sweating, and narrowing of vis-
ual ﬁ elds. Brief clonic jerking of the limbs may occur due to cerebral hypoperfusion, 
but there is no tonic/clonic sequence. Urinary incontinence is uncommon, and there 
is no tongue-biting. Unconsciousness usually lasts for ~2min and recovery is rapid.
Situation syncope Symptoms as for vasovagal syncope but with a clear precipi-
tant: cough syncope occurs after a paroxysm of coughing; effort syncope is brought 
on by exercise; there is usually a cardiac cause, eg aortic stenosis, HCM; micturition 
syncope happens during or after urination: mostly men, at night.
Carotid sinus syncope Hypersensitive baroreceptors cause excessive reﬂ ex brady-
cardia ± vasodilation on minimal stimulation (eg head-turning, shaving).
Epilepsy (p490) Features suggestive of this diagnosis include: attacks when asleep 
or lying down; aura; identiﬁ able triggers (eg TV); altered breathing; cyanosis; typical 
tonic–clonic movements; incontinence of urine; tongue-biting; prolonged post-ictal 
drowsiness, confusion, amnesia, and transient focal paralysis (Todd’s palsy).
Stokes–Adams attacks Transient arrhythmias (eg bradycardia due to complete 
heart block) cause cardiac output and LOC. The patient falls to the ground (often 
with no warning except palpitations; injuries are common), and is pale, with a slow 
or absent pulse. Recovery is in seconds: the patient ﬂ ushes, the pulse speeds up, and 
consciousness is regained. As with vasovagal syncope, anoxic clonic jerks may occur 
in prolonged LOC. Attacks may happen several times a day and in any posture.
Other causes Hypoglycaemia: (p214) Tremor, hunger, and perspiration herald light-
headedness or LOC; rare in non-diabetics. Orthostatic hypotension: Unsteadiness or 
LOC on standing from lying in those with inadequate vasomotor reﬂ exes: the elderly; 
autonomic neuropathy (p505); antihypertensive medication; overdiuresis; multisys-
tem atrophy (MSA; p494). Anxiety: Hyperventilation, tremor, sweating, tachycardia, 
paraesthesiae, light-headedness, and no LOC suggest a panic attack. Drop attacks: 
Sudden fall to the ground without LOC. Mostly benign and due to leg weakness but 
may also be caused by hydrocephalus, cataplexy, or narcolepsy. Factitious black-
outs: Pseudoseizures, Münchausen’s (p706).
Examination Cardiovascular, neurological. Measure BP lying and standing.
Investigation All with recurrent syncope (or falls) need cardiac assessment—ur-
gently  if  associated  with  palpitations,  arrhythmias,  3rd-degree  AV  block,  or  pro-
longed QT interval (p711). ECG ± 24h ECG (arrhythmia, long QT, eg Romano–Ward, p96); 
U&E, FBC, Mg2+, Ca2+, glucose; tilt-table test;3 EEG, sleep EEG; echocardiogram; CT/MRI 
brain; ABG if practical (PaCO2 in attacks suggests hyperventilation as the cause).
While the cause is being elucidated, advise against driving (see p158).

3  Patient is subject to continuous ECG and BP monitoring while strapped to a table and moved rapidly from 
resting horizontal position to vertical. Induction of symptoms with inappropriate  BP drop >30mmHg or 
bradycardia suggests neurally mediated syncope. Consider pacing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   460

_OHCM_10e.indb   460

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

461

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Blackout history
It  is  vital  to  establish  exactly  what  patients  mean  by  ‘blackout’:  loss  of 
consciousness?—a fall to the ground without loss of consciousness?—vertigo or 
visual disturbance? Talk to the patient and witnesses and let them tell you as 
much as possible without prompting or leading. Ask:
  • Does the patient lose awareness?
  • Does the patient injure themselves?
  • Does the patient move? Are they stiff  or ﬂ oppy? (A tonic phase preceding clonic 

jerking points towards epilepsy.)

  • Is there incontinence? (More common in epilepsy, but can occur with syncope.)
  • Does  their  complexion  change?  (Pale/cyanosis  suggests  epilepsy;  very  pale/

white suggests syncope or arrhythmia.)

  • Does the patient bite the side of their tongue? (Suggests epilepsy.)
  • Are there associated symptoms eg palpitations, sweats, pallor, chest pain, dysp-

noea (see ﬁ g 10.11)?

  • How long does the attack last?
Before the attack:
  • Is there any warning?—Eg typical epileptic aura or cardiac pre-syncope.
  • In what circumstances do attacks occur? (If watching TV, consider epilepsy).
  • Can the patient prevent attacks?
After the attack:
  • How much does the patient remember about the attack?
  • Is there muscle ache? (Suggests a tonic–clonic seizure.)
  • Is the patient confused or sleepy? (Suggests epilepsy.)
Background to attacks:
  • When did they start?
  • Are they getting more frequent?
  • Is anyone else in the family getting them? Sudden arrhythmic death may leave 
no evidence at postmortem, or there may be hereditary cardiomyopathy (refer 
those with a relative who has had a sudden unexplained death <40yrs old).

Fig  10.11  VT  causing  blackout  in  Brugada  syndrome  (p695).  This  patient  had  been  treated 
with an implantable deﬁ brillator (see p132).

_OHCM_10e.indb   461

_OHCM_10e.indb   461

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

462

Vertigo and dizziness

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Is  this  vertigo?  Complaints  of  ‘dizzy  spells’  are  very  common  and  are  used  by 
patients to describe many diff erent sensations. True vertigo is a hallucination of 
movement, often rotatory, of the patient or their surroundings. In practice, simple 
‘spinning’ is rare—the ﬂ oor may tilt, sink, or rise. The key to diagnosis is to ﬁ nd out ex-
actly what the patient means by ‘dizzy:’ if this is not vertigo or if atypical symptoms 
are present consider other causes, eg if there is loss of awareness, think of epilepsy 
or syncope; if there is faintness, lightheadedness, or palpitations, think of anaemia, 
dysrhythmia, anxiety, or hypotension.
Associated  symptoms:  Diffi  culty  walking  or  standing  (may  fall  suddenly  to  the 
ground), relief on lying or sitting still (vertigo is almost always worsened by move-
ment); nausea, vomiting, pallor, sweating. Associated hearing loss or tinnitus implies 
labyrinth or VIIIth nerve involvement.
Causes
Benign positional vertigo: Occurs on head movement due to disruption of debris in the 
semicircular canal of the ears (canalolithiasis). Fatiguable nystagmus on performing 
the Hallpike manoeuvre is diagnostic; Epley manoeuvres clear the debris (OHCS p555).
Acute labyrinthitis (vestibular neuronitis): Abrupt onset of severe vertigo, nausea, 
vomiting ± prostration. No deafness or tinnitus. Causes: virus; vascular lesion. Severe 
vertigo subsides in days, complete recovery takes 3–4wks. : reassure. Sedate.
Ménière’s disease: Increased pressure in the endolymphatic system of the inner ear 
causes recurrent attacks of vertigo lasting >20min, ﬂ uctuating (or permanent) sen-
sorineural hearing loss, and tinnitus (with a sense of aural fullness ± falling to one 
side). : bed rest and reassurance in acute attacks. An antihistamine (eg cinnarizine) 
is useful if prolonged, or buccal prochlorperazine if severe, for up to 7d.
Ototoxicity: Amino glycosides, loop diuretics, or cisplatin can cause deafness ± vertigo.
Acoustic  neuroma:  (ﬁ gs  10.12,  10.13)  Doubly  misnamed:  it  is  a  Schwannoma  (not 
neuroma)  arising  from  the  vestibular  (not  auditory)  nerve.  They  account  for 80% 
of  cerebellopontine  angle  tumours  and  often  present  with  unilateral  hearing  loss, 
with vertigo occurring later. Growth rate is slow (usually 1–2 mm/year) and can be 
predicted by serial MRIs. With progression, ipsilateral Vth , VIth , IXth , and Xth nerves 
may be aff ected (also ipsilateral cerebellar signs). Signs of  ICP occur late, indicating 
a large tumour. Commoner in  and neuroﬁ bromatosis (esp. NF2, p514).
Traumatic damage: If trauma aff ects the petrous temporal bone or the cerebello-
pontine angle then the auditory nerve may be damaged, causing vertigo, deafness, 
and/or tinnitus.
Herpes zoster: Herpetic eruption of the external auditory meatus; facial palsy ± deaf-
ness, tinnitus, and vertigo (Ramsay Hunt syndrome, see p501).
Others: Vertiginous epilepsy; MS; stroke/TIA; migraine; motion sickness; alcohol in-
toxication.

_OHCM_10e.indb   462

_OHCM_10e.indb   462

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Vestibular
nerve

Acoustic
neuroma

Facial
nerve

463

Cochlear
nerve

Fig 10.12  An acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma) growing dangerously near the 
facial nerve.

(a)

(b)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.13  Large vestibular schwannoma: axial T2W (a) and contrast-enhanced coronal MRI (b).

Reproduced from Manji et al., Oxford Handbook of Neurology, 2007, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   463

_OHCM_10e.indb   463

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

464

Hearing loss

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Whisper test A simple but eff ective crude assessment of hearing: whisper numbers 
in one ear while blocking the other. Ask your patient to repeat the number. Make sure 
that failure is not from misunderstanding.
Tuning fork tests Rinne: Hold a vibrating tuning fork (512Hz or 256Hz) on the mas-
toid to test bone conduction (BC). When the sound is no longer audible move it in 
front of the ear with the prongs perpendicular to the auditory canal to test air con-
duction (AC). If there is no conductive deﬁ cit (ie in normal hearing or sensorineural 
hearing loss), AC is better than BC and the patient will be able to hear the note again. 
This is a ‘Rinne positive’ result. If BC is better than AC (Rinne negative), this indicates 
conductive deafness >20dB. A false-negative may occur in severe sensorineural hear-
ing loss (SNHL) as the contralateral cochlea picks up the sound by bone conduction. 
Weber: With the vibrating tuning fork on the vertex or forehead, ask the patient 
which ear the sound is louder in. Sound localizes to the aff ected ear with conductive 
loss (>10dB loss), to the contralateral ear in SNHL, and to the midline if both ears are 
normal (or if bilateral SNHL).
Conductive deafness Causes: Wax (remove, eg by syringing with warm water af-
ter softening with olive oil drops), otosclerosis, otitis media, or glue ear (OHCS p546).
Chronic sensorineural deafness Often due to accumulated environmental noise 
toxicity, presbyacusis, or inherited disorders. Presbyacusis: Loss of acuity for high-
frequency sounds starts before 30yrs old. We do not usually notice it until hearing 
of speech is aff ected. Hearing is most aff ected in the presence of background noise. 
Hearing aids are the usual treatment.
Sudden sensorineural deafness Get an ENT opinion today (steroids may cure)! 
Causes:  Noise  exposure;  gentamicin/other  toxin;  mumps;  acoustic  neuroma;  MS; 
stroke; vasculitis; TB. Tests: ESR, FBC, LFT, pANCA, viral titres and  TB (see BOX ‘Diagnostic 
tests for TB’, p394); evoked response audiometry; CXR; MRI; lymph node and naso-
pharyngeal biopsy for culture.

Tinnitus

This ringing or buzzing in the ears is common, and may cause depression or insomnia. 
Investigate unilateral tinnitus fully to exclude an acoustic neuroma (p462).
Causes Inner ear damage and hearing loss (leading to auditory cortex hyper-excit-
ability), wax, excess noise, head injury, otitis media, post-stapedectomy, Ménière’s, 
anaemia (if pulsatile then think of carotid artery stenosis or dissection, AV ﬁ stulae, 
and glomus jugulare tumours). Drugs: Aspirin (reversible), loop diur etics, aminogly-
cosides. Mean age at onset: 40–50yrs. :≈1:1.
Management Exclude serious causes. Psychological support is very important: 
reassure that tinnitus does not mean madness or serious disease and that it often 
improves in time. Cognitive therapy helps, as do ‘tinnitus coping training’ and pa-
tient support groups. Drugs are disappointing: anticonvulsants (eg carbamazepine) 
are not of beneﬁ t; misoprostol appears to help (small-scale trials only); hypnotics 
at night may be of some beneﬁ t. Avoid tranquillizers, particularly if depressed (use 
tricyclic antidep ressants here). If Ménière’s disease is the cause, betahistine helps 
only a few. Masking may give relief: white noise (like an off -tuned radio) is given 
via a noise generator worn like a post-aural hearing aid. Hearing aids may help by 
amplifying desirable sounds. Cochlear nerve section is a drastic option that can 
relieve disabling tinnitus in 25% but at the expense of deafness.

_OHCM_10e.indb   464

_OHCM_10e.indb   464

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Bittersweet symphony
German  composer  Ludwig  van  Beethoven  (1770–1827)  began  to  lose  his  hearing 
from his early 30s—ﬁ rst high-frequency sounds were lost, associated with debili-
tating tinnitus: ‘My ears sing and buzz continually, day and night. I can truly say 
that I am living a wretched life...in my profession it is a frightful state.’ However, 
despite becoming profoundly deaf by the age of 44, he continued to compose and 
perform throughout his auditory decline. As deafness crept into the ears of the 
French composer, Gabriel Fauré (1845–1924), he composed less, but only after los-
ing his hearing did he manage to overcome his previous fear of writing a string 
quartert, telling his wife ‘This is a genre which Beethoven in particular made fa-
mous, and causes all those who are not Beethoven to be terriﬁ ed of it’. They are 
not the only masters of their ﬁ eld to overcome auditory impairment; so did cardi-
ologist Helen Taussig (see p92).

465

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

_OHCM_10e.indb   465

_OHCM_10e.indb   465

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

466

Acute bilateral leg weakness 

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

It is crucial to establish a diagnosis quickly to avoid permanent disability. Look for 
speciﬁ c patterns (see later in topic) and ask these questions to help elicit the diagnosis:
1      Where is the lesion? • Are the legs ﬂ accid or spastic? (ie LMN or UMN?) • Is there 
sensory loss?A sensory level usually means spinal cord disease. • Is there loss of 
bowel or bladder control? (Lesion more likely to be in the conus medullaris or 
cauda equina.)

2      What is the lesion? • Was onset sudden or rapidly progressive? This is an emer-
gency; it suggests cord compression so get urgent help (see next paragraph). • Are 
there any signs of infection (eg tender spine, T°, WCC, ESR, CRP: extradural abscess)?
Cord compression (See also p528.) Symptoms: Bilateral leg weakness (arm weak-
ness—often less severe—suggests a cervical cord lesion, see p508) a sensory level ± 
preceding back pain (see p542). Bladder (and anal) sphincter involvement is late and 
manifests as hesitancy, frequency, and, later, as painless retention. Signs: Look for 
a motor, reﬂ ex, and sensory level, with normal ﬁ ndings above the level of the lesion, 
LMN signs at the level (especially in cervical lesions), and UMN signs below the level 
(but remember tone and reﬂ exes are usually reduced in acute cord compression; 
OHCS p756). Causes: Secondary malignancy (breast, lung, prostate, thyroid, kidney) 
in the spine is commonest. Rarer: infection (epidural abscess), cervical disc prolapse, 
haematoma (warfarin), intrinsic cord tumour, atlanto–axial subluxation, myeloma. 
 : Transverse myelitis, MS, carcinomatous meningitis, cord vasculitis (PAN, syphilis), 
spinal artery thrombosis or aneurysm, trauma, Guillain–Barré syndrome (p702). In-
vestigations: Do not delay imaging at any cost. Spinal x-rays are unreliable; MRI is 
the deﬁ nitive modality. Biopsy or surgical exploration may be needed to identify the 
nature of any mass. Do a CXR (primary lung malignancy, lung secondaries, TB). Bloods: 
FBC, ESR, B12, syphilis serology, U&E, LFT, PSA, serum electrophoresis. Treatment: Give 
urgent dexamethasone in malignancy (p528) while considering more speciﬁ c thera-
py, eg radiotherapy or chemotherapy ± decompressive laminectomy; which is most 
appropriate depends on tumour type, quality of life, and likely prognosis. Epidural 
abscesses must be surgically decompressed and antibiotics given.
Cauda equina and conus medullaris lesions The big diff erence between these 
lesions and those high up in the cord is that leg weakness is ﬂ accid and areﬂ exic, 
not spastic and hyperreﬂ exic. Causes: As above, plus congenital lumbar disc disease 
and lumbosacral nerve lesions. Signs: Conus medullaris lesions feature mixed UMN/
LMN signs, leg weakness, early urinary retention and constipation, back pain, sacral 
sensory disturbance and erectile dysfunction. Cauda equina lesions feature back 
pain and radicular pain down the legs; asymmetrical, atrophic, areﬂ exic paralysis of 
the legs; sensory loss in a root distribution; and sphincter tone; do PR.
Other patterns of leg weakness
Unilateral foot drop: DM, common peroneal nerve palsy, stroke, prolapsed disc, MS.
Weak legs with no sensory loss: MND, polio , para sagittal meningioma (an exception 
to the rule that weak legs mean cord or distal lesion).
Chronic spastic paraparesis: MS, cord primary malignancy/metastasis, MND, syrin-
gomyelia,  subacute  combined  degeneration  of  the  cord  (p334),  hereditary  spastic 
paraparesis,  taboparesis  (tertiary  syphilis,  see  p412),  histiocytosis  X,  parasites  (eg 
schistosomiasis).
Chronic ﬂ accid paraparesis: Peripheral neur o pathy, myopathy.
Absent knee jerks and extensor plantars: (Ie combined LMN or UMN signs.) Com-
bined cervical and lumbar disc disease, conus medullaris lesions, MND, myeloradicu-
litis, Friedreich’s ataxia, subacute combined degeneration of the cord, taboparesis.4

4  Tertiary syphilis (p412): in tabes dorsalis the aff erent pathways from muscle spindles are lost, with 
reduced tone and tendon reﬂ exes (without weakness). Later, additional involvement of the pyramidal 
tracts causes taboparesis—a spastic paraparesis with the peculiar combination of extensor plantars 
(from the taboparesis) and absent tendon reflexes (from the tabes dorsalis).

_OHCM_10e.indb   466

_OHCM_10e.indb   466

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Gait disorders
Spastic: Stiff , circumduction of legs ± scuffi  ng of the toe of the shoes: UMN lesions.
Extrapyramidal: Flexed posture, shuffl  ing feet, slow to start, postural instability, 
eg Parkinson’s disease.
Apraxic: Pathognomonic ‘gluing-to-the-ﬂ oor’ on attempting walking or a wide-
based unsteady gait with a tendency to fall, like a novice on an ice-rink. Seen in 
normal pressure hydro cephalus and multi-infarct states.
Ataxic: Wide-based; falls; cannot walk heel-to-toe. Caused by cerebellar lesions 
(eg MS, posterior fossa tumours, alcohol, phenytoin toxicity); proprioceptive sen-
sory loss (eg sensory neuropathy,  B12). Often worse in the dark or with eyes closed.
Myopathic: Waddling gait, cannot climb steps or stand from sitting due to hip 
girdle weakness.
Psychogenic: Suspect if there is a bizarre gait not conforming to any pattern of 
organic gait disturbance and without any signs when examined on the couch.
Tests Spinal X-rays; MRI; FBC; ESR; syphilis serology; serum B12; U&E; LFT; PSA; serum 
electrophoresis; CXR; LP; EMG; muscle ± sural nerve biopsy.

467

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Non-neurological considerations in paralysed patients 
Avoid pressure sores by turning and review weight-bearing areas often. Use ap-
propriate  pressure-relieving  mattresses/cushions.  Prevent  thrombosis  in  para-
lysed limbs by frequent passive movement, pressure stockings, and LMWH (p350). 
Bladder care is vital; catheterization is only one option (do not control inconti-
nence by decreasing ﬂ uid intake). Bowel evacuation may be manual or aided by 
suppositories; increasing dietary ﬁ bre intake may help. Exercise of unaff ected or 
partially paralysed limbs is important to avoid unnecessary loss of function.

_OHCM_10e.indb   467

_OHCM_10e.indb   467

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

468

Abnormal involuntary movements (dyskinesia)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

These  are  characterized  by  impairment  of  the  planning,  control,  or  execution  of 
movement. They can have multiple manifestations:
Tremor Note frequency, amplitude, and exacerbating factors (stress; fatigue).
  • Rest tremor: Abolished on voluntary movement. Cause: parkinsonism (p494).
  • Intention tremor: Irregular, large-amplitude, worse at the end of purposeful acts, eg 
ﬁ nger-pointing or using a remote control. Cause: cerebellar damage (eg MS, stroke).
  • Postural tremor: Absent at rest, present on maintained posture (arms out stretched) 
and may persist (but is not worse) on movement. Causes: benign essential tremor 
(autosomal dominant; improves with alcohol), thyrotoxicosis, anxiety, -agonists.
  • Re-emergent tremor: Postural tremor developing after a delay of ~10s. Causes: 

Parkinson’s disease (don’t mistake for essential tremor).

Chorea  Non-rhythmic,  jerky,  purposeless  movements  ﬂ itting  from  one  place  to 
another—eg facial grimacing, raising the shoulders, ﬂ exing/extending the ﬁ ngers. 
Causes:  Huntington’s  disease,  Syden ham’s  chorea  (rare  complication  of  group  A 
streptococcal infection). Worsened by levodopa.
Hemiballismus  Large-amplitude,  ﬂ inging  hemichorea  (aff ects  proximal  muscles) 
contralateral to a vascular lesion of the subthalamic nucleus (often elderly diabet-
ics). Recovers spontaneously over months.
Athetosis  Slow,  sinuous,  conﬂ uent,  purposeless  movements  (especially  digits, 
hands, face, tongue), often diffi  cult to distinguish from chorea. Causes: Common-
est is cerebral palsy (OHCS p214). Most other ‘athetoid’ patterns may now be better 
classed as dystonias. Pseudoathetosis: Caused by severe proprioceptive loss.
Tics Brief, repeated, stereotyped movements which patients may suppress for a 
while. Tics are common in children (and usually resolve). In Tourette’s syndrome 
(p700), motor and vocal tics occur. Consider psychological support, clonazepam or 
clonidine if tics are severe (haloperidol may help but risks tardive dyskinesia).
Myoclonus Sudden involuntary focal or general jerks arising from cord, brainstem, 
or cerebral cortex, seen in metabolic problems, neurodegenerative disease (eg lysoso-
mal storage enzyme defects), CJD (p696), and myoclonic epilepsies (infantile spasms). 
Benign essential myoclonus: Childhood onset with frequent generalized myoclonus, 
without  progression.  Often  autosomal  dominant.  It  may  respond  to  valproate, 
clonazepam,  or  piracetam.  Asterixis  (‘metabolic  ﬂ ap’):  Jerking  (~1–2  jerks/sec)  of 
outstretched hands, worse with wrists extended, from loss of extensor tone—ie inco-
ordination between ﬂ exors and extensors (=‘negative myoclonus’). Causes: Liver or 
kidney failure, Na+, CO2, gabapentin, thalamic stroke (consider if unilateral).
Tardive  syndromes  Delayed  onset  yet  potentially  irreversible  symptoms  oc-
curing  after  chronic  exposure  to  dopamine  antagonists  (eg  antipsychotics,  an-
tiemetics).  Classiﬁ cation:  •Tardive  dyskinesia:  orobuccolingual,  truncal,  or 
choreiform movements, eg vacuous chewing and grimacing movements. •Tardive 
dystonia: sustained, stereotyped muscle spasms of a twisting or turning charac-
ter,  eg  retrocollis  and  back  arching/opisthotonic  posturing.  •Tardive  akathisia: 
sense  of  restlessness  or  unease  ±  repetitive,  purposeless  movements  (stereotyp-
ies, eg pacing). •Tardive myoclonus. •Tardive tourettism (p700). •Tardive tremor. 
Treating tardive dyskinesia: Gradually withdraw neuroleptics and wait 3–6 months. 
Tetrabenazine may help. Quetiapine, olanzapine, and clozapine are examples of atyp-
ical antipsychotics that are less likely to cause tardive syndromes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   468

_OHCM_10e.indb   468

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Dystonia
Dystonia describes prolonged muscle contractions causing abnormal posture or 
repetitive movements.
Idiopathic generalized dystonia: Childhood-onset dystonia often starting in one 
leg with ipsilateral progression over 5–10yrs. Autosomal dominant inheritance is 
common (DYT1 deletion). Exclude Wilson’s disease and dopa-responsive dystonia 
(needs  an  L-dopa  trial).  Anticholinergics  and  muscle  relaxants  may  help.  Deep 
brain stimulation for refractory, disabling symptoms.
Focal dystonias: Conﬁ ned to one part of the body, eg spasmodic torticollis (head 
pulled to one side), blepharospasm (involuntary contraction of orbicularis oculi, 
OHCS p417), writer’s cramp. Focal dystonias in adults are typically idiopathic, and 
rarely generalize. They are worsened by stress. Patients may develop a geste an-
tagoniste to try to resist the dystonic posturing (eg a touch of the ﬁ nger to the jaw 
in spasmodic torticollis). Injection of botulinum toxin into the overactive muscles 
is usually eff ective.
Acute dystonia: (ﬁ g 10.14) May occur on starting many drugs, including neuro-
leptics and some anti-emetics (eg metoclopramide, cyclizine). There is torticollis 
(head pulled back), trismus (oromandibular spasm), and/or oculogyric crisis (eyes 
drawn up). You may mistake this for tetanus or meningitis, but such react ions 
rapidly disappear after a dose of an anti cholinergic, see p843.

469

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.14  Oromandibular/oculogyric crisis in acute dystonia.
Reprinted from Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 78(9), Ritter et al., ‘Ondansetron-induced multifocal encepha-
lopathy’, 1150–2, 2003, with permission from Elsevier.

St Vitus’s dance 
Throughout the middle ages, Europe was plagued by epidemics of ‘dancing mania’, 
in which affl  icted individuals were described to have danced wildly, displaying 
strange contortions and convulsions until they collapsed from exhaustion. If the 
affl  icted touched a relic of St Vitus they were miraculously cured: observing this, 
Paracelsus, 16th-century Swiss-German physician and philosopher, described the 
phenomenon of chorea Sancti Viti (‘St Vitus’s dance’). There may have been an in-
fectious component, although mass hysteria induced by religious cults that swept 
across  medieval  Europe  seems  a  more  likely  cause.  Chorea  was  subsequently 
used as a general term for large-amplitude involuntary movements before be-
ing further reﬁ ned by physicians such as Sydenham (though he did not connect 
his  eponymous  chorea  seen  in  rheumatic  fever  with  an  infectious  trigger)  and 
Charcot. Nowaways, a more frequent cause of involuntary movements with be-
havioural disturbance is NMDA-receptor antibody encephalitis, the impact of which 
was documented in Susannah Cahalan’s excellent 2012 autobiography Brain on 
Fire: My Month of Madness.

_OHCM_10e.indb   469

_OHCM_10e.indb   469

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

470

Stroke: clinical features and acute management

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Infarction or bleeding into the brain manifests with sudden-onset focal CNS signs. 
Someone in the UK has a stroke every 3.5 minutes; 1 in 4 of those will die within a year 
and half of survivors will have a permanent disability.
Causes  • Small  vessel  occlusion/cerebral  microangiopathy  or  thrombosis  in  situ. 
• Cardiac emboli (AF; endocarditis; MI—see BOX ‘Cardiac causes of stroke’, p473). • 
Atherothromboembolism (eg from carotids). • CNS bleeds (BP, trauma, aneurysm 
rupture,  anticoagulation,  thrombolysis).  Other  causes:  Consider  in  younger  pa-
tients: sudden BP drop by ≥40mmHg (most likely to aff ect the boundary zone be-
tween vascular beds), carotid artery dissection (spontaneous, or from neck trauma 
or ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia), vasculitis, subarachnoid haemorrhage (p478), venous 
sinus  thrombosis  (p480),  anti phos pho lipid  syndrome,  thrombophilia  (p374),  Fabry 
disease (p698), CADASIL.5
Diff  erentials Head injury, hypo/hyperglycaemia, subdural haemorrhage, intracranial 
tumours,  hemiplegic  migraine,  post-ictal  (Todd’s  palsy),  CNS lymphoma,  Wernicke’s 
encephalopathy, hepatic encephalopathy, encephalitis, toxoplasmosis, cerebral ab-
scesses, mycotic aneurysm, drug overdose (if comatose).
Modiﬁ able risk factors BP, smoking, DM, heart disease (valvular, ischaemic, AF), 
peripheral vascular disease, PCV, carotid bruit, combined OCP, lipids, alcohol use, 
clotting (eg plasma ﬁ brinogen, antithrombin III, p374), homocysteine, syphilis.
Signs Worst at onset. Pointers to bleeding (unreliable!): meningism, severe head-
ache, coma. Pointers to ischaemia: carotid bruit, AF, past TIA, IHD. Cerebral infarcts: 
(50%.) Depending on site there may be contralateral sensory loss or hemiplegia—
initially ﬂ accid (ﬂ oppy limb, falls like a dead weight when lifted), becoming spastic 
(UMN);  dysphasia;  homonymous  hemianopia;  visuo-spatial  deﬁ cit.  Brainstem  in-
farcts: (25%.) Varied; include quadriplegia, disturbances of gaze and vision, locked-
in syndrome (aware, but unable to respond). Lacunar infarcts: (25%). Basal ganglia, 
internal capsule, thalamus, and pons.) Five syndromes: ataxic hemiparesis, pure mo-
tor, pure sensory, sensorimotor, and dysarthria/clumsy hand. Cognition/conscious-
ness are intact except in thalamic strokes.
Acute management  Protect the airway: This avoids hypoxia/aspiration.
  • Maintain homeostasis: Blood glucose: keep between 4–11 mmol/L. Blood pressure: 
only treat if there is a hypertensive emergency (eg encephalopathy or aortic dissec-
tion) or thrombolysis is considered (ideally aim for  185/110) as treating even very 
high BPS may impair cerebral perfusion.

  • Screen swallow: ‘Nil by mouth’ until this is done (but keep hydrated).
  • CT/MRI within 1h: Essential if: thrombolysis considered, high risk of haemorrhage 
(GCS, signs of ICP, severe headache, meningism, progressive symptoms, bleeding 
tendency or anti coagulated), or unusual presentation (eg ﬂ uctuating consciousness, 
fever). Otherwise imaging less urgent (aim <24h). Diff usion-weighted MRI is most 
sensitive for an acute infarct, but CT helps rule out primary haemorrhage (ﬁ g 10.15).
  • Antiplatelet agents: Once haemorrhagic stroke is excluded, give aspirin 300mg 
(continue for 2 weeks, then switch to long-term antithrombotic treatment, p472).
  • Thrombolysis: Consider this as soon as haemorrhage has been excluded, provided 
the onset of symptoms was ≤4.5h ago.2 The beneﬁ ts of thrombolysis outweigh the 
risks within this window, though best results are within 90min. Alteplase is the 
agent of choice and must be given by trained staff , ideally within an expert acute 
stroke team.  Always do CT 24h post-lysis to identify bleeds.6 CI to thrombolysis: 
• Major infarct or haemorrhage on  CT. • Mild/non-disabling deﬁ cit. • Recent sur-
gery,  trauma,  or  artery  or  vein  puncture  at  uncompressible  site.  •Previous  CNS 
bleed. • AVM/aneurysm. • Severe liver disease, varices, or portal hypertension. • Sei-
zures at presentation. • Blood glucose (<3 or >22). • Stroke or serious head injury 
in last 3 months. • GI or urinary tract haemorrhage in the last 21 days. •Known 
clotting disorder. • Anticoagulants or INR >1 . 7. • Platelets <100 ≈ 109/L. • History of 
intracranial neoplasm. • Rapidly improving symptoms. • BP >180/105.

  • Thrombectomy:  Intra-arterial  mechanical  thrombectomy  provides  additional 
beneﬁ t for those with large artery occlusion in the proximal anterior circulation.
 Admit to an acute stroke unit: multidisciplinary care improves outcomes (p474). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   470

_OHCM_10e.indb   470

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

471

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.15  The T2-weighted (p746) image on the left shows oedema in the right occipital lobe. Dif-
ferentials: infarct (right PCA), inﬂ ammation, or tumour. The diff usion-weighted image on the right 
shows limited diff usion in the region, indicating this is an infarct. 
©Prof Peter Scally.

Act FAST
Several public health measures have aimed to increase awareness of stroke and 
the seriousness of the condition: the relabelling of stroke as a ‘brain attack,’ and 
via the graphic mass media FAST campaign = Facial asymmetry, Arm/leg weak-
ness, Speech diffi  culty, Time to call 999. The publicity surrounding this acronym has 
increased recognition of the symptoms of stroke and emphasized the urgency of 
seeking medical help; following the introduction of the campaign in 2011 the NHS 
in England saw a 24% rise in stroke-related 999 calls.

5  Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts & Leucoencephalopathy: the main 
genetic cause of stroke (there is also an autosomal recessive form).
6  If +ve, register at SITS, www.sitsinternational.org

_OHCM_10e.indb   471

_OHCM_10e.indb   471

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

472

Stroke: investigation and prevention

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Primary prevention (Ie before any stroke.)
Control  risk  factors  (p470):  look  for  and  treat  hypertension,  DM,  lipids  (p690), 
cardiac  disease  (see  BOX ‘Cardiac  causes  of  stroke’)  and  help  quit  smoking  (see 
p93). Exercise helps (HDL, glucose tolerance). Use lifelong anticoagulation in  AF 
(see  BOX ‘Cardiac causes of stroke’) and prosthetic heart valves. • For prevention 
post-TIA see p476.
Secondary prevention (Ie preventing further strokes.)
Control risk factors (as Primary prevention mentioned above): there is a considerable 
advantage from lowering blood pressure and cholesterol (even if not particularly raised). 
Antiplatelet agents after stroke: (See BOX ‘Antiplatelets’.) If no primary haemorrhage 
on CT, give 2 weeks of aspirin 300mg, then switch to long-term clopidogrel monother-
apy. If this is CI or not tolerated then give low dose aspirin plus slow-release dipyrida-
mole. Anticoagulation after stroke from AF: See BOX ‘Cardiac causes of stroke’.
Tests (See p470 for imaging.) Investigate promptly to identify risk factors for fur-
ther strokes, but consider whether results will aff ect management. Look for:
  • Hypertension. Look for retinopathy (p560), nephropathy, or cardiomegaly on CXR.
  • Cardiac source of emboli. (See  BOX ‘Cardiac causes of stroke’.) 24h  ECG to look 
for AF (p130). CXR may show an enlarged left atrium. Echocardiogram may reveal 
mural thrombus due to  AF or a hypokinetic segment of cardiac muscle post-MI. 
It  may  also  show  valvular  lesions  in  infective  endocarditis  or  rheumatic  heart 
disease. Trans oesophageal echo is more sensitive than transthoracic.

  • Carotid artery stenosis. Do carotid Doppler US ± CT/MRI angiography. Beneﬁ ts and 
risks of revascularization should be individualized by an expert but generally most 
with ≥ 70% stenosis and life expectancy ≥ 5yrs will beneﬁ t while some (especially 
) will beneﬁ t with 50–69% stenosis7 (see p476). Carotid endarterectomy is the 
procedure of choice; endovascular carotid artery angioplasty with stenting is an 
alternative for those unﬁ t for surgery and achieves similar long-term outcomes but 
has higher peri-procedure stroke and mortality rates. 

  • Hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, dyslipidaemia, and hyperhomocysteinaemia.
  • Vasculitis. ESR, ANCA (p556). VDRL to look for active, untreated syphilis (p412).
  • Prothrombotic states, eg thrombophilia (p374), antiphospholipid syndrome (p554).
  • Hyperviscosity, eg polycythaemia (p366), sickle-cell disease (p340).
  • Thrombocytopenia and other bleeding disorders.
  • Genetic tests. CADASIL (p470); Fabry disease (p698).
Prognosis Overall mortality: 60 000/yr; UK 20% at 1 month, then 10%/yr. Full recov-
ery: ≤ 40%. Drow si ness ≈ poor prognosis. Avoid pressure ulcers (ﬁ g 10.16).

7  Interventions for 50–69% stenoses can be justiﬁ able; individualize risk and check local guidelines. In 
particular, check which criteria used to estimate degree of stenosis since NASCET (North American Sympto-
matic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial) criteria tend to include some more severe lesions in 50–69% range as 
compared to the ECST (European Carotid Surgery Trialists’ Collaborative Group) criteria.

_OHCM_10e.indb   472

_OHCM_10e.indb   472

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Cardiac causes of stroke
Cardioembolic causes are the source of stroke in >30% of patients, and may be 
hinted at if there are bilateral infarcts on imaging.
Non-valvular atrial ﬁ brillation: (p130) Associated with an overall risk of stroke of 
4.5%/yr, and ischaemic strokes in AF carry a worse prognosis.
  • CHA2DS2VASC score (p131) can be used to calculate risk of stroke in patients with 
AF. Off er anticoagulation in patients with a score of 2 or above. Take bleeding 
risk into account: calculate the risk of major bleeding using the HAS-BLED score. 
Caution and regular review of oral anticoagulants are required if the HAS-BLED 
score >3.  Do not off er stroke prevention therapy in patients with AF if <65y and 
CHA2DS2VASC score is 0 for men or 1 for women.

  • Anticoagulation (see p350) can be commenced 2wks after a stroke (or from 
7–10d  if  clinically  and  radiologically  small).  Off er  a  direct  oral  anticoagulant 
(DOAC) or warfarin (p350), following a discussion of risks and beneﬁ ts.

Other cardiac sources of emboli: • Cardioversion. • Prosthetic valves. • Acute 
myocardial infarct with large left ventricular wall motion abnormalities on 
echocardiography. • Patent foramen ovale/septal defects. • Cardiac surgery. • In-
fective endocarditis (gives rise to septic emboli; 20% of those with endocarditis 
present with CNS signs).

Antiplatelets: mechanism of action
Aspirin: Inhibits COX-1, suppressing prostaglandin and thromboxane synthesis.
Clopidogrel:  A  thienopyridine  that  inhibits  platelet  aggregation  by  modifying 
platelet ADP receptors, preventing further strokes and MIS.
Dipyridamole: CAMP and thromboxane A2.

(a)

(b)

473

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

(c)

(d)

Fig 10.16  Categorization of pressure ulcers. (a) Stage 1: non-blanchable redness of intact skin, 
typically over a bony prominence. (b) Stage 2: partial thickness loss of dermis presenting as a shal-
low open ulcer with a red/pink wound bed, without slough. May also present as an intact or open/
ruptured sero-sanguinous blister. (c) Stage 3: full thickness skin loss with visible subcutaneous fat. 
Bone, tendon, or muscle are not exposed. (d) Stage 4: full thickness tissue loss wth exposed bone, 
tendon, or muscle.

Images (a) to (d) reproduced from Gosney et al., Oxford Desk Reference: Geriatric Medicine, 2012, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   473

_OHCM_10e.indb   473

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

474

Re-enablement after stroke

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Coordinated multidisciplinary care on a specialized stroke unit is essential, and leads 
to better patient outcomes. Rehabilitation must be started early post-stroke in order 
to maximize improvement and prevent complications related to immobility such as 
pressure sores, aspiration pneumonia, constipation, and contractures. Ongoing input 
after discharge consolidates inpatient gains and helps align the individual with their 
previous capability. It also helps with depression—both in the patient and their carer. 
Setting achievable goals and acknowledging the patient’s own agenda is key.
Imperatives for re-enablement
  • Watch the patient swallow a small volume of water; if signs of aspiration (a cough 
or voice change) make nil by mouth until formal assessment by a speech therapist. 
Use IV ﬂ uids, then semi-solids (eg jelly; avoid soups and crumbly food). Avoid early 
NG tube feeds; these may be needed to safeguard nutrition in those with swallowing 
problems that persist beyond the ﬁ rst 2–3d. If swallowing fails to recover, consider 
beneﬁ ts of enteral feeding tube placement (p759). Speech therapists skilled in assess-
ing swallowing diffi  culties are invaluable here.

  • Avoid further injury: minimize falls risk and take care when lifting the patient not 

to damage their shoulders.

  • Ensure good bladder and bowel care through frequent toileting. Avoid early cath-

eterization which may prevent return to continence.

  • Position to minimize spasticity (occurs in ~40%). Get prompt physiotherapy. Splints 

and botulinum toxin injections are helpful for focal spasticity.

  • Monitor progress: eg measure time taken to sit up and transfer to chair.
  • Monitor  mood:  in  pseudo-emotionalism/emotional  lability  (sobbing  unprovoked 
by  sorrow,  from  failure  of  cortical  inhibition  of  the  limbic  system),  tricyclics  or 
ﬂ uoxetine may help.

  • Engage the patient in their own recovery by making physiotherapy fun. Swimming 
(a hemiplegic arm may be supported on a special ﬂ oat), music, and video games are 
all enjoyable and  recovery through promoting cerebral reorganization. Constraint 
of the good arm may be helpful.

Involve the carer/spouse with all aspects of care-giving. Good rehab saves lives.
Tests Asking to point to a named part of the body tests perceptual function. Copy-
ing matchstick patterns tests spatial ability. Dressing or copying a clock face tests 
for apraxia (p86). Picking out and naming easy objects from a pile tests for agnosia 
(acuity OK, but cannot mime use; guesses are way-out, semantically, and phonetically). 
Screen for depression (low mood; inability to feel pleasure or to concentrate).
End-of-life decisions See p13.

_OHCM_10e.indb   474

_OHCM_10e.indb   474

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Assessing dependence in daily life
Handicap entails inability to carry out social functions. ‘A disadvantage for a given 
individual, resulting from an impairment or disability, that limits or prevents the 
fulﬁ lment of a role.’ Two people with the same impairment (eg paralysed arm) 
may have diff erent disabilities (table 10.5, eg one may be able to dress but the 
other cannot). Disabilities are likely to determine quality of future life. Treatment 
is often best aimed at reducing disability, not curing disease. For example, Velcro® 
fasteners in place of buttons may enable a person to dress.
Table 10.5  Barthel’s index of activities of daily living
Bowels

0 Incontinent (or needs to be given enemas)
1 Occasional accidents (once a week)
2 Continent
0 Incontinent, or catheter inserted but unable to manage it
1 Occasional accidents (up to once per 24h)
2 Continent (for more than 7 days)
0 Needs help with personal care: face, hair, teeth, shaving
1
0 Dependent
1 Needs some help but can do some things alone
2 Independent (on and off , wiping, dressing)
0 Unable
1 Needs help in cutting, spreading butter, etc.
2 Independent (food provided within reach)
0 Unable to get from bed to commode: the vital transfer to prevent 

Independent (implements provided)

475

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

the need for 24-hour nursing care

Independent

1 Major help needed (physical, 1–2 people), can sit
2 Minor help needed (verbal or physical)
3
0 Immobile
1 Wheelchair-independent, including corners, etc.
2 Walks with help of one person (verbal or physical)
3
0 Dependent
1 Needs help but can do about half unaided
2 Independent (including buttons, zips, laces, etc.)
0 Unable
1 Needs help (verbal, physical, carrying aid)
2 Independent up and down

Independent

Bladder

Grooming

Toilet use

Feeding

Transfer

Mobility

Dressing

Stairs

Bath/shower 0 Dependent
1

Independent (must get in and out unaided and wash self)

Mahoney FI, Barthel DW: Functional evaluation: the Barthel Index. 
Maryland State Medical Journal. 1965; 14:61–65.

Barthel’s paradox
The more we contemplate Barthel’s eulogy of independence, the more we see it as 
a mirage reﬂ ecting a greater truth about human aff airs: there is no such thing 
as independence—only interdependence—and in fostering this interdependence 
lies our true vocation:

No man is an Island, intire of it selfe; every man is a peece of the Continent, a 
part of the maine; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea, Europe is the lesse, 
as well as if a promontorie were, as well as if a Mannor of thy friends or of 
thine owne were. Any man’s death diminishes me, because I am involved in 
mankinde; And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls: It tolls 
for thee.

John Donne 1572–1631; Meditation XVII.

_OHCM_10e.indb   475

_OHCM_10e.indb   475

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

476

Transient ischaemic attack (TIA)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

This is an ischaemic (usually embolic) neurological event with symptoms lasting <24h 
(often much shorter).  Without intervention, more than 1 in 12 patients will go on to 
have a stroke within a week, so prompt management is imperative.
Signs  Speciﬁ c  to  the  arterial  territory  involved  (p450).  Amaurosis  fugax  occurs 
when the retinal artery is occluded, causing unilateral progressive vision loss ‘like a 
curtain descending’. Global events (eg syncope, dizziness) are not typical of TIAs. At-
tacks may be single or many; multiple highly stereotyped attacks (‘crescendo’ TIAs) 
suggest a critical intra cranial stenosis (commonly the superior division of the MCA).
Causes (See p470.) • Atherothromboembolism from the carotid is the chief cause: 
listen for bruits (though not a sensitive test). • Cardioembolism: mural thrombus 
post-MI or in  AF, valve disease, prosthetic valve (p473). • Hyperviscosity: eg poly-
cythaemia, sickle-cell anaemia, myeloma. • Vasculitis is a rare, non-embolic cause of 
TIA symptoms (eg cranial arteritis, PAN, SLE, syphilis, etc.).
Diff  erentials  Hypoglycaemia,  migraine  aura  (p458),  focal  epilepsy  (symptoms 
spread over seconds and often include twitching and jerking), hyperventilation, reti-
nal bleeds. Rare mimics of TIA: Malignant hypertension, MS (paroxysmal dysarthria), 
intra cranial tumours, peripheral neuropathy, phaeochromocytoma, somatization.
Tests  FBC,  ESR,  U&Es, glucose, lipids,  CXR,  ECG, carotid Doppler ± angiography,  CT or 
diff usion-weighted MRI, echo cardio gram.
Treatment
  • Control  cardio vascular  risk  factors:  Optimize:  BP  (cautiously  lower;  aim  for 
<140/85mmHg, p140); hyperlipidaemia (p690); DM (p206); help to stop smoking (p93).
  • Antiplatelet drugs: As with stroke, give aspirin 300mg OD for 2wks, then switch to 
clopidogrel 75mg OD. If this is contraindicated or not tolerated, give aspirin 75mg 
OD combined with slow-release dipyridamole.

  • Anticoagulation indications: Cardiac source of emboli (see p473).
  • Carotid endarterectomy: Perform within 2wks of ﬁ rst presentation if 70–99% ste-
nosis8 and operative risk is acceptable (higher risk in: , >75y, systolic BP, contralat-
eral artery occ luded; ipsilateral carotid syphon/external carotid stenosed). Do not 
stop aspirin preoperatively. Surgery is preferred to endovascular carotid artery an-
gioplasty with stenting in those ﬁ t enough to tolerate due to higher peri-procedure 
stroke and mortality rates with stenting. 

Driving Prohibited for at least 1 month, see p158.
Prognosis Long-term risks of stroke or cardiovascular events following TIAs are de-
pendent on underlying vascular risk factors: calculate using the ABCD2 score (see BOX 
and table 10.6).

8  Interventions for 50–69% stenoses can be justiﬁ able; individualize risk and check local guidelines. In 
particular, check which criteria used to estimate degree of stenosis since NASCET (North American Sympto-
matic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial) criteria tend to include some more severe lesions in 50–69% range as 
compared to the ECST (European Carotid Surgery Trialists’ Collaborative Group) criteria.

_OHCM_10e.indb   476

_OHCM_10e.indb   476

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

When should TIA lead to emergency referral?
The ABCD2 score is a helpful tool to stratify which patients are at higher risk of hav-
ing a stroke following a suspected TIA (table 10.6).
Table 10.6  The ABCD2 score

477

Age ≥60 yrs old
Blood pressure ≥140/90
Clinical features

Unilateral weakness
Speech disturbance without weakness

Duration of symptoms
Symptoms lasting ≥1h
Symptoms lasting 10–59min

Diabetes

1 point
1 point

2 points
1 point

2 points
1 point
1 point

A score of ≥4 indicates that the patient is at high risk of an early stroke, and must 
be assessed by a specialist within 24h. A score of ≥6 strongly predicts a stroke (8 . 1% 
within 2 days, 35.5% in the next week). Other factors that suggest increased risk 
are: • AF • >1 TIA in a week • TIA while anticoagulated. Crucially, risk is lowest if the 
patient is treated in a specialized stroke unit (p474).

ABCD2 score reprinted from The Lancet, 366, Rothwell et al., ‘A simple score (ABCD) to identify 
individuals at high early risk of stroke after transient ischaemic attack’, 29–36. 
2003, with permission from Elsevier.

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

_OHCM_10e.indb   477

_OHCM_10e.indb   477

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

478

Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Spontaneous bleeding into the subarachnoid space, often catastrophic (table 10.7).
Incidence 9/100 000/yr; typical age: 35–65.
Symptoms Sudden-onset excruciating headache, typically occipital—like a ‘thun-
derclap’. Vomiting, collapse, seizures, and coma often follow. Coma/drowsiness may 
last for days. Some patients report a preceding, ‘sentinel’ headache, perhaps due to 
a small warning leak from the off ending aneurysm (~6%).
Signs Neck stiff ness; Kernig’s sign (takes 6h to develop); retinal, subhyaloid and vit-
reous bleeds (=Terson’s syndrome; mortality ≈ 5). Focal neurology at presentation 
may suggest site of aneurysm (eg pupil changes indicating a IIIrd nerve palsy with 
a  posterior  communicating  artery  aneurysm)  or  intracerebral  haematoma.  Later 
deﬁ cits suggest complications (see later in topic). 
Causes • Berry  aneurysm  rupture  (80%). Common sites: junctions of poster ior 
communicating with the internal carotid (see ﬁ g 10.3, p451) or of the anterior com-
municating with the anterior cerebral artery, or bifurcation of the middle cerebral 
artery (ﬁ g 10.17). 15% are multiple. •Arterio-venous malform ations (15%).• Other 
causes; encephalitis, vasculitis, tumour (invading blood vessels), idiopathic.
Risk factors Previous aneurysmal SAH (new aneurysms form, old ones get bigger), 
smoking, alcohol misuse, BP, bleeding disorders, SBE (mycotic aneurysm), family his-
tory (3–5x risk of SAH in close relatives). Polycystic kidneys, aortic coarctation, and 
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (p149) are all associated with berry aneurysms.
Diff  erentials Meningitis (p822), migraine (p458), intracerebral bleed, cortical vein 
thrombosis (p480), dissection of a carotid or vertebral artery, benign thunderclap 
headache (triggered by Valsalva manoeuvre, eg cough, coitus).
Tests • Urgent CT: Detects >95% of SAH within the 1st 24h (ﬁ g 10.18). • Consider 
LP: If CT Ωve but the history is very suggestive of SAH (and no CI: p768). This needs to 
be done >12h after headache onset to allow breakdown of RBCs so that a positive 
sample is xanthrochromic (yellow, due to bilirubin: diff erentiaties between old blood 
from SAH vs a ‘bloody tap’).
Management Refer all proven SAH to neurosurgery immediately.
  • Re-examine CNS often; chart BP, pupils, and GCS (p788). Repeat CT if deteriorating.
  • Maintain cerebral perfusion by keeping well hydrated, but aim for SBP <160mmHg.
  • Nimodipine (60mg/4h PO for 3wks, or 1mg/h IVI) is a Ca2+ antagonist that reduces 

vasospasm and consequent morbidity from cerebral ischaemia.

  • Surgery:  endovascular  coiling  vs  surgical  clipping  (requiring  craniotomy):  the 
decision  depends  on  the  accessibility  and  size  of  the  aneurysm,  though  coiling 
is preferred where possible (fewer complications, better outcomes). Do catheter 
or  CT  angiography  to  identify  single  vs  multiple  aneurysms  before  intervening. 
Newer techniques such as balloon remodelling and ﬂ ow diversion can be helpful 
in anatomically challenging aneurysms.

Complications Rebleeding is the commonest cause of death, and occurs in 20%, 
often in the 1st few days. Cerebral ischaemia due to vasospasm may cause a perma-
nent CNS deﬁ cit, and is the commonest cause of morbidity. If this happens, surgery 
is not helpful at the time but may be so later. Hydrocephalus, due to blockage of 
arachnoid granulations, requires a ventricular or lumbar drain. Hyponatraemia is 
common but should not be managed with ﬂ uid restriction. Seek expert help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   478

_OHCM_10e.indb   478

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

479

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Table 10.7  Mortality in subarachnoid haemorrhage
Grade

Signs
None
Neck stiff ness and cranial nerve palsies
Drowsiness
Drowsy with hemiplegia
Prolonged coma

I

II

III

IV

V

Mortality: %
0
11
37
71
100

Most mortality occurs in 1st month. 90% of survivors of the 1st month, survive >1 year.

Unruptured aneurysms: ‘the time-bomb in my head’
Bear in mind the old adage: ‘if it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁ x it’—usually, risks of pre-
ventive intervention outweigh any beneﬁ ts, except perhaps in •young patients 
(more years at risk, and surgery is twice as hazardous if >45yrs old)  who have 
•aneurysms >7mm in diameter, especially if located at the •junction of the inter-
nal carotid and the posterior communicating cerebral artery, or at the •rostral 
basilar artery bifurcation, and especially if there is •uncontrolled hypertension or 
a •past history of bleeds. Data from the 2003 International Study of Unruptured 
Intracranial Aneurysms (ISUIA) show that relative risk of rupture for an aneurysm 
7–12mm across is 3.3 compared with aneurysms <7mm across; if the diameter is 
>12mm, the relative risk is 17.

Fig  10.17  CT  images  can  be  manipulated  to 
show  only  high-density  structures  such  as 
bones and arteries containing contrast. Here is 
a middle cerebral artery aneurysm.
We thank Prof. Peter Scally for these CT images and 
the commentaries on them.

Fig 10.18  Blood from a ruptured aneur ysm oc-
cupies the interhemispheric ﬁ ssure (top arrow), 
a crescentic intracerebral area presumably near 
the  aneurysm  (2nd  arrow),  the  basal  cisterns, 
the lateral ventricles (temporal horns), and the 
4th ventricle (bottom arrow).
We thank Prof. Peter Scally for these CT images and 
the commentaries on them.

_OHCM_10e.indb   479

_OHCM_10e.indb   479

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

480

Intracranial venous thrombosis (IVT)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Thrombosis of the cerebral sinuses or veins causes cerebral infarction, though much 
less commonly than arterial disease. Seizures are common and focal; they can com-
plicate diagnosis and post-ictal drowsiness may impair GCS assessment. Although 
~80% will make a good functional recovery, death is mainly due to transtentorial 
herniation from mass eff ect or oedema.9
Dural venous sinus thrombosis Most commonly sagittal sinus thrombosis (ﬁ gs 
10.19,  10.20;  47%  of  all  IVT)  or  transverse  sinus  thrombosis  (35%).  Sagittal  sinus 
thrombosis often coexists if other sinuses are thrombosed. Symptom onset is gradu-
al (over days or weeks). Features are dependent on the sinus aff ected:
  • Sagittal sinus: Head ache, vomiting, seizures, vision, papilloedema.
  • Transverse sinus: Headache ± mastoid pain, focal CNS signs, seizures, papilloedema.
  • Sigmoid sinus: Cerebellar signs, lower cranial nerve palsies.
  • Inferior  petrosal  sinus:  Vth  and  VIth  cranial  nerve  palsies,  with  temporal  and 
retro-orbital pain (Gradenigo’s syndrome., suggesting otitis media is the cause).
  • Cavernous  sinus:  Often  due  to  spread  from  facial  pustules  or  fol liculitis,  causing 
headache, chemosis, oedematous eyelids, proptosis, painful ophthalmoplegia, fever.
Cortical vein thrombosis (CVT) Usually occurs with a sinus thrombus as it extends 
into the cortical veins, causing infarction in a venous territory (ﬁ g 10.21). These infarcts 
give rise to stroke-like focal symptoms that develop over days. There are often seizures, 
and an associated headache which may come on suddenly (thunderclap headache).
Causes Numerous, including anything that promotes a hypercoagulable state (p374). 
Common  causes:  Pregnancy/puerperium,  combined  OCP,  head  injury,  dehydration, 
blood dyscrasias, tumours (local invasion/pressure), extracranial malignancy (hyperco-
agulability), recent LP. Other causes: Infection (meningitis, abscesses, otitis media, cer-
ebral malaria, TB), Drugs (eg antiﬁ brinolytics, androgens), SLE, vasculitis, Crohn’s or UC.
Diff  erential  diagnosis  Subarachnoid  haemorrhage,  meningitis,  encephalitis,  in-
tracranial abscess, arterial infarction.
Investigations  Exclude  subarachnoid  haemorrhage  (if  thunderclap  headache, 
p478) and meningitis (p822). Bloods: Thrombophilia screen. Imaging: CT/MRI venog-
raphy may show the absence of a sinus (ﬁ g 10.19), though an absent transverse sinus 
can  be  a  normal  variant.  MRI  T2-weighted  gradient  echo  sequences  can  visualize 
thrombus directly (ﬁ g 10.20), and also identify haemorrhagic infarction. CT may be 
normal early, but show a ﬁ lling defect at ~1wk (delta sign). LP (if no CI): raised open-
ing pressure. CSF may be normal, or show RBCS and xanthochromia.
Management  Seek  expert  help.  Anticoagulation  with  heparin  or  LMWH  and  then 
warfarin (INR 2–3) may beneﬁ t even if there is secondary cerebral haemorrhage (un-
less otherwise CI). If there is deterioration despite adequate anticoagulation, endo-
vascular thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy may provide limited beneﬁ t (but 
not in those with large infarcts and impending herniation). ICP requires prompt at-
tention (p830); decompressive hemicraniectomy may prevent impending herniation.

9  Predictors of poor prognosis include: GCS score on admission <9, deep CVT location, CNS infection, malig-
nancy, intracranial haemorrhage, mental status abnormality, age >37 years, and .

_OHCM_10e.indb   480

_OHCM_10e.indb   480

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

481

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig  10.19  This  magnetic  resonance 
venogram (MRV) could look normal at 
ﬁ rst glance: the hardest thing to see 
in  imaging  is  often  that  which  is  not 
there.  Much  of  the  superior  sagittal 
sinus is not seen because it is ﬁ lled with 
clot—a superior sagittal sinus thrombo-
sis. The arrows point to where it should 
be seen. Posteriorly, the irregularity of 
the vessel indicates non-occlusive clot.
Image and commentary courtesy
of Prof. P. Scally.

Fig 10.20  MRI showing thrombus (arrows) in the sagittal sinus (sagittal T1-weighted image, LEFT), 
and in the right transverse sinus (axial T2-weighted image, RIGHT). Often more than one sinus is 
Image courtesy of Dr David Werring.
involved. 

Fig 10.21  Venous territories (compare with arterial territories on p451). SSS—superior 
sagittal sinus; TS—transverse sinus; SV—Sylvian veins; ICV—internal cortical veins.
    There is much greater variation in venous anatomy between individuals than there 
is in arterial anatomy, so this diagram is only a rough guide. The key point is to realize 
that infarction that crosses boundaries between arterial territories may be venous 
in origin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   481

_OHCM_10e.indb   481

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

482

Subdural haematoma

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Consider this very treatable condition in all whose conscious level ﬂ uctuates, and 
also in those having an ‘evolving stroke’, especially if on anticoagulants. Bleeding 
is from bridging veins between cortex and venous sinuses (vulnerable to decelera-
tion injury), resulting in accumulating haematoma between dura and arachnoid. This 
gradually raises ICP, shifting midline structures away from the side of the clot and, if 
untreated, eventual tentorial herniation and coning. Most subdurals are from trauma 
but the trauma is often forgotten as it was so minor or so long ago (up to 9 months).
It can also occur without trauma (eg ICP; dural metast ases). The elderly are most 
susceptible, as brain atrophy makes bridging veins vulnerable. Other risk factors: 
falls (epileptics, alcoholics); anticoagulation.
Symptoms  Fluctuating  level  of  consciousness  (seen  in  35%)  ±  insidious  physical 
or intellectual slowing, sleepiness, headache, personality change, and unsteadiness.
Signs ICP (p830), seizures. Localizing neurological symptoms (eg unequal pupils, 
hemiparesis) occur late, often >1 month after the injury.
Diff  erentials Stroke, dementia, CNS masses (eg tumours, abscesses).
Imaging (ﬁ g 10.22) CT/MRI shows clot ± midline shift (but beware bilateral isodense 
clots). Look for crescent-shaped collection of blood over 1 hemisphere. The sickle-
shape diff erent iates subdural blood from extradural haemorrhage.
Management Reverse clotting abnormalities urgently. Surgical management de-
pends on the size of the clot, its chronicity, and the clinical picture: generally those 
>10mm or with midline shift >5mm need evacuating (via craniotomy or burr hole 
washout). Address the cause of the trauma (eg falls, abuse).

Extradural (epidural) haematoma

 Beware deteriorating consciousness after any head injury that initially produced 
no loss of consciousness or after initial drowsiness post injury seems to have re-
solved. This lucid interval pattern is typical of extradural bleeds.
Cause Suspect after any traumatic skull fracure. Often due to a fractured temporal 
or parietal bone causing laceration of the middle meningeal artery and vein, typically 
after trauma to a temple just lateral to the eye. Any tear in a dural venous sinus will 
also result in an extradural bleed. Blood accumulates between bone and dura.
Clinical features The lucid interval may last a few hours to a few days before a 
bleed declares itself by GCS from rising ICP. Increasingly severe headache, vomit-
ing,  confusion,  and  seizures  follow,  ±  hemiparesis  with  brisk  reﬂ exes  and  an  up-
going  plantar.  If  bleeding  contin ues,  the  ipsilateral  pupil  dilates,  coma  deepens, 
bilateral  limb  weakness  develops,  and  breathing  becomes  deep  and  irregular 
(brainstem compression). Death follows a period of coma and is due to respiratory 
arrest. Bradycardia and BP are late signs.
Diff  erentials Epilepsy, carotid dissection, carbon monoxide poisoning.
Tests  CT  (ﬁ g  10.23)  shows  a  haematoma  (often  biconvex/lens-shaped;  the  blood 
forms a more rounded shape compared with the sickle-shaped subdural haemato-
ma as the tough dural attachments to the skull keep it more localized). Skull X-ray 
may be normal or show fracture lines crossing the course of the middle meningeal 
vessels. Lumbar puncture is contraindicated.
Management  Stabilize  and  transfer  urgently  (with  skilled  medical  and  nursing 
escorts) to a neurosurgical unit for clot evacuation ± ligation of the bleeding ves-
sel. Care of the airway in an unconscious patient and measures to ICP often re-
quire intubation and ventilation (+ mannitol IVI, p831).
Prognosis  Excellent  if  diagnosis  and  operation  early.  Poor  if  coma,  pupil  abnor-
malities, or decerebrate rigidity are present pre-op.

_OHCM_10e.indb   482

_OHCM_10e.indb   482

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Fig  10.22  This  image  explains  the  cause 
as well as the path ology. On the patient’s 
left, cerebral sulci are prominent and prior 
to  this  adverse  event  would  have  been 
even  larger.  The  brain  had  shrunk  within 
the skull as a result of atherosclerosis, and 
poor perfusion, leaving large sub arachnoid 
spaces. A simple, quick rotation of the head 
is enough to tear a bridging vein, causing 
this acute subdural haematoma.

We thank Prof. Peter Scally 
for these CT images and commentary.

483

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig  10.23  The  blood  (high  atten uation, 
fusiform  or  biconvex  collection)  on  the 
right side is limited anteriorly by the coro-
nal suture and posteriorly by the lambdoid 
suture.  This  is  therefore  an  extradural 
haem at oma. The low-attenuation CSF den-
sity collection on the left is causing scallop-
ing of the overlying bone. It is in the typical 
location of an arachnoid cyst; an incidental 
ﬁ nding of a congenital abnor mality.

We thank Prof. Peter Scally 
for these CT images and commentary.

_OHCM_10e.indb   483

_OHCM_10e.indb   483

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

484

Delirium (acute confusional state)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Delirium10 aff ects up to 50% of inpatients >65y, and is associated with a longer ad-
mission, more complications, and higher mortality. Look for an underlying cause 
in any acute ﬂ uctuating, baffl  ing behaviour change; it may be an early indication of 
treatable pathology (eg UTI).
Clinical  features  Globally  impaired  cognition,  perception,  and  consciousness 
which develops over hours/days, characterized by a marked memory deﬁ cit, dis-
ordered or disorientated thinking, and reversal of the sleep–wake cycle. Some pa-
tients  experience  tactile  or  visual  hallucinations.  Delirium  can  be:  •hyperactive, 
with restlessness, mood lability, agitation, or aggression •hypoactive in which the 
patient becomes slow and withdrawn or •mixed. Hypoactive and mixed delirium 
are  much  harder  to  recognize:  it  is  crucial  to  compare  current  behaviour  to  the 
patient’s baseline (see BOX).
Risk factors >65y, dementia/previous cognitive impairment, hip fracture, acute ill-
ness, psychological agitation (eg pain).
Causes
  • Surgery/post-GA.
  • Systemic infection: pneumonia, UTI, malaria, wounds, IV lines.
  • Intracranial infection or head injury.
  • Drugs/drug withdrawal: opiates, levodopa, sedatives, recreational.
  • Alcohol withdrawal (2–5d post-admission; LFTS, MCV; history of alcohol abuse).
  • Metabolic: uraemia, liver failure, Na+ or glucose, Hb, malnutrition (beriberi, p268).
  • Hypoxia: respiratory or cardiac failure.
  • Vascular: stroke, myocardial infarction.
  • Nutritional: thiamine, nicotinic acid, or B12 deﬁ ciency.
Diff  erentials  Dementia  (see  BOX),  anxiety,  epilepsy:  non-convulsive  status  epi-
lepticus is an underdiagnosed cause of impaired cognition and odd behaviour: con-
sider  an  EEG.  Primary  mental  illness  (eg  schizophrenia)  can  also  mimic  delirium, 
but this is rare on the wards (especially if no past history).
Tests Look for the cause (eg UTI, pneumonia, MI): do FBC, U&E, LFT, blood glucose, 
ABG, septic screen (urine dipstick,  CXR, blood cultures); also consider  ECG, malaria 
ﬁ lms, LP, EEG, CT.
Management As well as identifying and treating the underlying cause, aim to:3
  • Reorientate the patient: explain where they are and who you are at each encounter. 

Hunt down hearing aids/glasses. Visible clocks/calendars may help.

  • Encourage visits from friends and family.
  • Monitor ﬂ uid balance and encourage oral intake . Be vigilant for constipation.
  • Mobilize and encourage physical activity.
  • Practise sleep hygeine: restrict daytime napping, minimize night-time disturbance.
  • Avoid or remove catheters, IV cannulae, monitoring leads and other devices (they 

increase infection risk and may get pulled out).

  • Watch out for infection and physical discomfort/distress.
  • Review medication and discontinue any unnecessary agents. Only use sedation if the 
patient is a risk to their own/other patients’ safety (never use physical restraints). 
Consider haloperidol 0.5–2mg, or chlorpromazine 50–100mg, PO if they will take it, 
IM if not (p15). Wait 20min to judge eff ect—further doses can be given if needed. 
NB: avoid chlor promazine  in the  elderly and in alcohol withdrawal (p280); avoid 
antipsychotics in those with Parkinson’s disease or Lewy body dementia.

Be aware that delirium may persist beyond the duration of the original illness by 
several weeks in the elderly. Do not assume this must be dementia—provide support 
and reassess 1–2 months later.

10  Delirium, from the Latin de (from) and lira (ridge between furrows), meaning ‘out of one’s furrow’.

_OHCM_10e.indb   484

_OHCM_10e.indb   484

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Delirium vs dementia
One is often mistaken for the other, yet perhaps the interconnectedness of these 
two conditions is greater than we realize: not only is dementia the leading risk 
factor for delirium, but delirium itself confers a greater risk of subsequently de-
veloping dementia.4 It is likely that this is due to a number of factors: delirium is a 
marker of vulnerability of the brain, and may also emphasize previously unrecog-
nized dementia symptoms. Furthermore, there may be direct causation through 
the noxious insults incurred during an episode of delirium, which can lead to per-
manent neuronal damage.

In distinguishing the two conditions (not always an easy task) the presence of 
inattention,  distractibility,  and  disorganized  thinking  will  all  point  you  towards 
delirium. But the fundamental question is ‘Has there been an acute change from 
the  patient’s  cognitive  baseline?’  Family  or  carer  collateral  reports  are  invalu-
able, but may not always be available. Document cognition in all patients >65y 
admitted to hospital (eg  AMTs, p64, many admission proformas allow for this). 
This will then allow you to compare their admission score with subsequent assess-
ments and track any improvements, deteriorations, or ﬂ uctuations in cognition
throughout the admission.

485

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

_OHCM_10e.indb   485

_OHCM_10e.indb   485

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

486

Dementia

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

A  neurodegenerative  syndrome  with  progressive  decline  in  several  cognitive  do-
mains. The initial presentation is usually of memory loss over months or years (look 
for other causes if over days/weeks). Prevalence increases with age: 20% of people 
>80yrs are known to have dementia, yet probably only half of cases are diagnosed.
Diagnosis  Is  made  by: History  from  the  patient  with  a  thorough  collateral  nar-
rative—ask about the timeline of decline and the domains aff ected. Non-cognitive 
symptoms such as agitation, aggression, or apathy indicate late disease.5 Cognitive 
testing: Use a validated dementia screen such as the AMTS (p64) or similar, plus short 
tests of executive function and language. Carry out a mental state examination to 
identify anxiety, depression, or hallucinations. Examination may identify a physical 
cause, risk factors (eg for vascular dementia), or parkinsonism. Medication review 
is important to exclude drug-induced cognitive impairment.
Investigations  Look  for  reversible/organic  causes:  TSH/B12/folate  (treat  low-
normals, p334), thiamine (eg alcohol), Ca2+. Check MSU, FBC, ESR, U&E, LFT, and glu-
cose. An MRI (preferred to CT) can identify other reversible pathologies (eg subdural 
haematoma, p482; normal-pressure hydrocephalus11), as well as underlying vascular 
damage or structural pathology. Functional imaging (FDG, PET, SPECT) may help de-
lineate subtypes where diagnosis is not clear. Consider EEG in: suspected delirium, 
frontotemporal dementia, CJD, or a seizure disorder. If clinically indicated then check 
autoantibodies, syphilis, HIV, CJD, or other rare causes (see later in topic).
Subtypes • Alzheimer’s disease (AD): See p488. • Vascular dementia: (~25%.) Cu-
mulative eff ect of many small strokes: sudden onset and stepwise deterioration is 
characteristic (but often hard to recognize). Look for evidence of arteriopathy (BP, 
past strokes, focal  CNS signs). Do not use acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or me-
mantine in these patients. • Lewy body dementia: (15–25%.) Fluctuating cognitive 
impairment,  det ailed  visual  hallucinations,  and  later,  parkinsonism  (p494).  Histol-
ogy is characterized by Lewy bodies (eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies) 
in brainstem and neocortex. Avoid using antipsychotics in Lewy body dementia 
(risk of SE, see p489). • Fronto-temporal dementia: Frontal and temporal atrophy 
with loss of >70% of spindle neurons. Patients display executive impairment; be-
havioural/personality change; disinhibition; hyperorality, stereotyped behaviour, and 
emotional unconcern. Episodic memory and spatial orientation are preserved until 
later stages. Pick’s disease refers to the few fronto-temporal dementia patients who 
have Pick inclusion bodies on histology (spherical clusters of tau-laden neurons).
Other causes Alcohol/drug abuse; repeated head trauma; pellagra (p268), Whip-
ple’s disease (p716); Huntington’s (p702); CJD (p696); Parkinson’s (p494); HIV; crypto-
coccosis (p408); familial autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s; CADASIL (p470).
Management Refer suspected or diagnosed dementia to integrated memory ser-
vices for further assessment and management. Medication: (p489). Avoid drugs that 
impair cognition (eg neuroleptics, sedatives, tricyclics). Non-pharmacological inter-
ventions: Non-cognitive symptoms (eg agitation) may respond to measures such as 
aromatherapy, multisensory stimulation, massage, music, and animal-assisted therapy.
Other considerations • Depression: Common. Try an SSRI (eg citalopram 10–20mg 
OD) or, if severe, mirtazapine (15–45mg at night if eGFR >40). Cognitive behavioural 
therapy can help with social withdrawal and catastrophic thinking. • Capacity: Can 
the patient make decisions regarding medical or ﬁ nancial aff airs? Wherever possible, 
allow them to. Suggest making an advanced directive or appointing a Lasting Power 
of Attorney in the early stages of the disease.

11  Dilated vent ricles without enlarged sulci. Signs: gait apraxia, incontinence, de m entia; CSF shunts help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   486

_OHCM_10e.indb   486

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Who will care for the carers? 
Our ageing population and improvements in medicine mean that we not only have 
an increasing number of people with dementia in the UK, but that those people are 
living longer with the disease in more advanced stages. Their needs become more 
complex and they become increasingly dependent. Currently, informal (mostly fam-
ily) carers of people with dementia save the UK £11 billion a year. Yet this is not an 
easy task: most dementia suff erers display behavioural or psychological symptoms, 
which can be particularly distressing for the carer. Carer stress is inevitable and 
causes morbidity and mortality. Ameliorate this with:
  • A care coordinator (via Social Services or the local Old Age Community Mental 
Healthcare Team); vital to coordinate the various teams and services available:

  • Laundry services for soiled linen
  • Car badge giving priority parking
  • Help from occupational therapist, district 
nurses, and community psychiatric nurses

  • Attendance allowance
  • Respite care in hospital
  • Council tax rebate (forms 
from local council offi  ce).

  • Day services can be invaluable for stimulating patients and providing regular, 

much-needed breaks for carers.

  • Moral support Support groups, telephone helplines, and charities can all ease the 

burden, eg UK Alzheimer’s Disease Society.

  • Combatting challenging behaviour: First rule out pain, infection, and depres-
sion. Then consider trazodone (50–300mg at night) or lorazepam (0.5–1mg/12–24h 
PO). Haloperidol (0.5–4mg) can be useful in the short term. 

487

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

_OHCM_10e.indb   487

_OHCM_10e.indb   487

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

488

Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

This leading cause of dementia is the big neuropsychiatric disorder of our times, 
dominating the care of the elderly and the lives of their families who give up work, 
friends, and ways of life to support relatives through the long ﬁ nal years as they exit 
into their ‘worlds of preoccupied emptiness’. Suspect AD in adults >40yrs with per-
sistent,12 progressive, and global cognitive impairment: visuo-spatial skill, memory, 
verbal abilities, and executive function (planning) are all aff ected, unlike other de-
mentias which may aff ect certain domains but not others (identify which with neu-
ropsychometric tests). There is also anosognosia—a lack of insight into the problems 
engendered by the disease, eg missed appointments, misunderstood conversations 
or plots of ﬁ lms, and mishandling of money. Later there may be irritability; mood dis-
turbance (depression or euphoria); behavioural change (eg aggression, wandering, 
disinhibition); psychosis (hallucinations or delusions); agnosia (may not recognize 
self  in  the  mirror).  There  is  no  standard  natural  history.  Cognitive  impairment  is 
progressive, but non-cognitive symptoms may come and go over months. Eventually 
many patients become sedentary, taking little interest in anything.
Cause  Environmental  and  genetic  factors  both  play  a  role.  Accumulation  of 
-amyloid peptide, a degradation product of amyloid precursor protein, results in 
progressive neuronal damage, neuroﬁ b rillary tangles, numbers of amyloid plaques, 
and loss of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ﬁ g 10.24). Neuronal loss is selective—
the hippocampus, amygdala, temporal neocortex, and subcortical nuclei are most 
vulnerable. Vascular eff ects are also important—95% of AD patients show evidence 
of vascular dementia.
Risk  factors  1st-degree  relative  with  AD;  Down’s  syndrome  (in  which  AD  is  in-
evitable, often <40yrs); homozygosity for apolipoprotein E (ApoE) E4 allele (see BOX 
‘Genetics and the future’); PICALM, CL1 & CLU variants; vascular risk factors (BP, dia-
betes,  dyslipidaemia,  homocysteine,  AF);  physical/cognitive  activity;  depression; 
loneliness (risk ≈ 2; simply living alone is not a risk factor); smoking.
Management  See  p486  for  a  general  approach  to  management  in  dementia. 
• Refer  to  a  specialist  memory  service.  • Acetylcholinesterase  inhibitors  (see  BOX  
‘Pharmacological treatment’). • BP control (in heart failure there is a 2x risk of AD; 
extra risk halves with BP control).
Prevention in the context of  AD’s time-course: Changes in  CSF -amyloid are seen 
~25yrs before onset of unequivocal symptoms (USy) and its deposition is detected 
15yrs before  USy.  CSF tau protein and brain atrophy are also detected 15yrs before 
USy.  Cerebral  hypometabolism  and  impaired  episodic  memory  occur  10yrs  before 
USy.  Global  cognitive  impairment  occurs  5yrs  before  USy.  Prevention  will  probably 
be most eff ective before any of this starts—though there is currently insuffi  cient 
evidence to recommend any speciﬁ c interventions (BOX ‘Genetics and the future’). 
Ultimately, there is no simple relationship between brain structure, neuroﬁ brillary 
tangles, and function.
Prognosis Mean survival = 7yrs from USy.

12  ‘Enduring’ doesn’t mean unﬂ uctuating: cognition comes and goes, allowing poetic insights, as in Iris 
Murdoch’s poignant self-diagnosis: ‘I am sailing into the dark’.

_OHCM_10e.indb   488

_OHCM_10e.indb   488

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

489

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Pharmacological treatment of cognitive decline
There is overlap between Lewy body dementia, AD, and Parkinson’s disease (PD), 
complicating treatment decisions:  L-dopa (p495) can precipitate delusions, and 
antipsychotic drugs worsen PD. Rivastigmine may help all three.
Acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  inhibitors:  Donepezil,  rivastigmine,  and  galan-
tamine are all mod estly eff ective in treating AD and are recommended by NICE.6 
There  is  also  some  evidence  for  their  effi  cacy  in  the  dementia  of  Parkinson’s 
disease,  and  rivastigmine  may  improve  behavioural  symptoms  in  Lewy  body 
dementia—though none should be used in mild disease and they should be dis-
continued if there is no worthwile eff ect on symptoms. Doses:
  • Donepezil: initially 5mg PO, eg doubled after 1 month.
  • Riva stig mine: 1.5mg/12h initially,  to 3–6mg/12h. Patches are also available.
  • Galantamine: initially 4mg/12h,  to 8–12mg/12h PO.
The cholinergic eff ects of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may exacerbate pep-
tic ulcer disease and heart block. Ask about symptoms and do an ECG ﬁ rst.
Antiglutamatergic treatment: Memantine (an NMDA antagonist, p449) is reason-
ably eff ective in late-stage AD, and is recommended in patients with severe disease 
or those with moderate disease in which AChE inhibitors are not tolerated/CI. Dose: 
5mg/24h  initially,   by  5mg/d  weekly  to  10mg/12h.  SE:  hallucinations,  confusion, 
hypertonia, hypersexuality.
Antipsychotics: Consider in severe, non-cognitive symptoms only (eg psychosis or 
extreme agitation). Possible increased risk of stroke/TIA so discuss risks and as-
sess cerebrovascular risk factors. Avoid in mild-to-moderate: Lewy body dementia 
(risk of neuroleptic sensitivity reactions), AD, and vascular dementia.
Vitamin supplementation: Trials of dietary and vitamin supplements have been 
mixed and disappointing. Perhaps the best evidence exists for vitamin E (2000IU 
OD) which may confer a modest beneﬁ t in delaying functional progression in mild 
to moderate AD, but with no eff ect on cognitive performance.

Genetics and the future
Possession of the APOE4 allele on chromosome 19 is the leading genetic cause of AD; 
homozygosity increases risk of developing the disease 12x. Yet while identifying 
this risk could enable a person to make lifestyle changes, there is little else to be 
done but anticipate one’s impending cognitive decline (just one of the dilemmas 
raised by genetic testing). While the proteins that make up the plaques and neuroﬁ -
brillary tangles seen in AD were identiﬁ ed in the early 1980s, progress has since been 
slow. So much so that in 2013, world leaders pledged to have a drug that would halt 
dementia within the next 10 years. Now a second-generation tau aggregation in-
hibitor called LMTX just might do the job, having shown success in phase III clinical 
trials in patients with mild/moderate AD, with clinical improvement and a slowing 
of atrophy on MRI. Perhaps in the imminent future, identifying those at greater risk 
of developing AD through genetic testing will have a role.

one 

exhibiting 

Fig  10.24  Normal  neuron  (left) 
and 
senile 
plaques  and  neuroﬁ brillary  tan-
gles  (right).  The  corresponding 
changes  on  functional  neuroim-
aging are also shown.

_OHCM_10e.indb   489

_OHCM_10e.indb   489

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

490

Epilepsy: diagnosis

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Epilepsy is a recurrent tendency to spontaneous, intermittent, abnormal elec trical 
activity in part of the brain, manifesting as seizures. Convulsions are the motor signs 
of elect rical discharges.
Elements of a seizure Some patients may experience a preceding prodrome last-
ing hours or days in which there may be a change in mood or behaviour. An aura 
implies a focal seizure, often, but not necessarily, from the temporal lobe. It may be a 
strange feeling in the gut, an experience such as déjà vu or strange smells or ﬂ ashing 
lights. Post-ictally there may be headache, confusion, and myalgia; or temporary 
weakness after a focal seizure in the motor cortex (Todd’s palsy, p712), or dysphasia 
following a focal seizure in the temporal lobe.
Causes  ⅔  are  idiopathic.  Structural:  Cortical  scarring  (eg  head  injury  years  be-
fore onset), developmental (eg dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumour or corti-
cal dysgenesis), space-occupying lesion, stroke, hippocampal sclerosis (eg after a 
febrile convulsion), vascular malformations. Others: Tuberous sclerosis, sarcoido-
sis, SLE, PAN, antibodies to voltage-gated potassium channels.
Diagnosis Can be diffi  cult due to the heterogenous nature of the disease (there are 
>40 diff erent types of epilepsy). NICE estimate 5–30% of people with ‘epilepsy’ have 
been wrongly diagnosed.  All patients with a seizure must be referred for specialist 
assessment and investigation in <2 wks.
Take a thorough history: Including a detailed description from a witness. Ask spe-
ciﬁ cally about tongue-biting and a slow recovery. If this is a ﬁ rst seizure, enquire 
about  past  funny  turns/odd  behaviour.  Déjà  vu  and  odd  episodic  feelings  of  fear 
may well be relevant. Are there any triggers (eg alcohol, stress, ﬂ ickering lights/TV)? 
Triggered attacks tend to recur.
Establish the type of seizure: See BOX ‘Seizure classiﬁ cation’.7 NB: if a seizure be-
gins with focal features, it is a partial seizure, however rapidly it then generalizes. 
Don’t forget non-epileptic attack disorder ( = ‘pseudo’ seizures—psychogenic): this 
is not uncommon. (Suspect if seizures have a gradual onset, prolonged duration, and 
abrupt termination and are accompanied by closed eyes ± resistance to eye opening, 
rapid breathing, ﬂ uctuating motor activity, and episodes of motionless unrespon-
siveness. CNS exam, CT, MRI, and EEG are normal. It may coexist with true epilepsy.)
Rule out provoking causes: Most people would have a seizure given suffi  cient prov-
ocation (eg reﬂ ex anoxic seizures in faints) but would not be classed as epileptic: only 
3–10% of provoked seizures recur; generally when the provocation is irreversible. 
Causes: trauma; stroke; haemorrhage; ICP; alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal; 
metabolic disturbance (hypoxia, Na+ , Ca2+, glucose, uraemia, liver disease); in-
fection (eg meningitis, encephalitis); T°; drugs (tricyclics, cocaine). Unprovoked 
seizures have a recur rence rate of 30–50%.
Investigations Look for provoking causes. Consider an EEG: it cannot exclude epi-
lepsy and can be falsely +ve, so don’t do one if simple syncope is the likely diagno-
sis.  Only  do  emergency  EEGS  if  non-convulsive  status  is  the  problem.  Other  tests: 
MRI  (structural  lesions);  drug  levels  (if  on  anti-epileptics:  is  the  patient  compli-
ant?); drugs screen; LP (eg if infection suspected).
Counselling  After  any  ‘ﬁ t’,  advise  about  dangers,  eg  swimming,  driving,  heights 
until the diagnosis is known; then give individualized counselling on employment, 
sport,  insurance,  and  conception  (OHCS  p28).  The  patient  must  contact  DVLA  and 
avoid driving until seizure-free for >1yr (p159).

_OHCM_10e.indb   490

_OHCM_10e.indb   490

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

491

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Seizure classiﬁ cation
Focal seizures Originating within networks linked to one hemisphere and often 
seen with underlying structural disease. Various subclasses include:
  • Without  impairment  of  consciousness:  (Previously  described  as  ‘simple’.)
Awareness is unimpaired, with focal motor, sensory (olfactory, visual, etc.), au-
tonomic, or psychic symptoms. No post-ictal symptoms.

  • With impairment of consciousness: (Previously described as ‘complex’.)Aware-
ness is impaired—either at seizure onset or following a simple partial aura. Most 
commonly arise from the temporal lobe, in which post-ictal confusion is a fea-
ture.

  • Evolving to a bilateral, convulsive seizure: (Previously described as ‘secondary 
generalized’.) In ⅔ of patients with partial seizures, the electrical disturbance, 
which start s focally, spreads widely, causing a generalized seizure, which is typi-
cally convulsive.

Generalized  seizures  Originating  at  some  point  within,  and  rapidly  engaging 
bilaterally  distributed  networks  leading  to  simultaneous  onset  of  widespread 
electrical discharge with no localizing features referable to a single hemisphere. 
Important subtypes include:
  • Absence  seizures:  Brief (≤10s) pauses, eg suddenly stops talking in mid-sen-

tence, then carries on where left off . Presents in childhood.

  • Tonic–clonic  seizures:  Loss  of  consciousness.  Limbs  stiff en  (tonic),  then  jerk 
(clonic). May have one without the other. Post-ictal confusion and drowsiness.
  • Myoclonic seizures: Sudden jerk of a limb, face, or trunk. The patient may be 
thrown suddenly to the ground, or have a violently disobedient limb: one patient 
described it as ‘my ﬂ ying-saucer epilepsy’, as crockery which happened to be in 
the hand would take off .

  • Atonic (akinetic) seizures: Sudden loss of muscle tone causing a fall, no LOC.
  • Infantile spasms: (OHCS p206) Commonly associated with tuberous sclerosis.
NB: the classiﬁ cation of epileptic syndromes is separate to the classiﬁ cation of 
seizures, and is based on seizure type, age of onset, EEG ﬁ ndings, and other features 
such as family history.

Localizing features of focal seizures
Temporal lobe •Automatisms—complex motor phenomena with impaired aware-
ness, varying from primitive oral (lip smacking, chewing, swallowing) or manual 
movements (fumbling, ﬁ ddling, grabbing) , to complex actions. •Dysphasia. •Déjà 
vu  (when  everything  seems  strangely  familiar),  or  jamais  vu  (everything  seems 
strangely unfamiliar). •Emotional disturbance, eg sudden terror, panic, anger, or 
elation, and derealization (out-of-body experiences).• Hallucinations of smell, taste, 
or sound. •Delus ional behaviour. • Bizarre associations—eg ‘Canned music at Tesco 
always makes me cry and then pass out’.
Frontal lobe •Motor features such as posturing or peddling movements of the 
legs. •Jacksonian march (a spreading focal motor seizure with retained aware-
ness, often starting with the face or a thumb). •Motor arrest. •Subtle behavioural 
disturbances  (often  diagnosed  as  psychogenic).  •Dysphasia  or  speech  arrest. 
•Post-ictal Todd’s palsy (p712).
Parietal  lobe  •Sensory  disturbances—tingling,  numbness,  pain  (rare).  •Motor 
symptoms (due to spread to the pre-central gyrus).
Occipital lobe •Visual phenomena such as spots, lines, ﬂ ashes.

_OHCM_10e.indb   491

_OHCM_10e.indb   491

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

492

Epilepsy: management 

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Living with epilepsy creates many problems: inability to drive and drug side-eff ects 
to name a few. Good management of the condition by an integrated specialized team 
is therefore of utmost importance.
Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDS) Should only be commenced by a specialist, after con-
ﬁ rmed epilepsy diagnosis, ≥2 seizures (unless risk of recurrence is high, eg struc-
tural brain lesion, focal CNS deﬁ cit, or unequivocal epileptiform EEG), and following 
a detailed discussion of treatment options with the patient. AED choice depends on 
seizure type and epilepsy syndrome, comorbidities, lifestyle, and patient preference:
  • Focal (partial) seizures: 1st line: carbamazepine or lamotrigine. 2nd line: leveti-

racetam, oxcarbazepine, or sodium valproate.13

  • Generalized tonic-clonic seizures: 1st line: sodium valproate13 or lamotrigine. 2nd 

line: carbamazepine, clobazam, levetiracetam, or topiramate.

  • Absence seizures: 1st line: sodium valproate13 or ethosuximide. 2nd line: lamotrigine.
  • Myoclonic seizures: 1st line: sodium valproate.13 2nd line: levetiracetam, or topira-
mate (but SE). Avoid carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine—may worsen seizures.

  • Tonic or atonic seizures: Sodium valproate13 or lamotrigine.
Treat with one drug and with one doctor in charge only. Slowly build up doses over 
2–3  months  (see  BOX ‘Anti-epileptic  drugs  (AEDS)’)  until  seizures  are  controlled  or 
maximum dosage is reached. If ineff ective or not tolerated, switch to the next most 
appropriate drug. To switch drugs, introduce the new drug slowly, and only with-
draw the 1st drug once established on the 2nd. Dual (adjunct) therapy is necessary 
in <10% of patients—consider if all appropriate drugs have been tried singly at the 
optimum dose.
Stopping AEDS: May be done under specialist supervision if the patient has been 
seizure-free for >2yrs and after assessing risks and beneﬁ ts for the individual (eg 
the need to drive). The dose must be decreased slowly: over at least 2–3 months, or 
>6 months for benzodiazepines and barbiturates.
Other  interventions  Psychological  therapies:  Eg  relaxation,  CBT.  May  beneﬁ t 
some, but do not improve seizure frequency so only use as an adjunct to medica-
tion. Surgical intervention: Can be considered if a single epileptogenic focus can 
be identiﬁ ed (such as hippocampal sclerosis or a small low-grade tumour). Neuro-
surgical resection off ers up to 70% chance of seizure resolution, but carries the risk 
of  causing  focal  neurological  deﬁ cits.  Alternatives:  vagal  nerve  stimulation,  deep 
brain stimulation (DBS).
Sudden  unexpected  death  in  epilepsy  (SUDEP)  More  common  in  uncontrolled 
epilepsy, and may be related to nocturnal seizure-associated apnoea or asystole.
Those with epilepsy have 3x mortality. >700 epilepsy-related deaths are recorded/
yr in the UK; up to 17% are SUDEPs. The charity SUDEP Action may be of some help 
to families.

13  Sodium valproate is associated with signiﬁ cantly risk of birth and developmental defects in children 
born to exposed mothers. Use in women of childbearing potential with caution and only after counselling. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   492

_OHCM_10e.indb   492

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

493

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDS): typical adult doses and side-eff  ects 
Carbamazepine: (As slow-release.) Initially 100mg/12h, increase by 200mg/d eve-
ry 2wks up to max 1000mg/12h. SE: leucopenia, diplopia, blurred vision, impaired 
balance, drowsi ness, mild generalized erythematous rash, SIADH (rare; see p673).
Lamotrigine:  As  monotherapy,  initially  25mg/d,    by  50mg/d  every  2wks  up  to 
100mg/12h (max 250mg/12h). Halve monotherapy dose if on valproate; double if 
on carbamazepine or pheny toin (max 350mg/12h). SE: maculopapular rash—occurs 
in 10% (but 1/1000 develop Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necroly-
sis) typically in 1st 8wks, especially if on valproate; warn patients to see a doctor at 
once if rash or ﬂ u symptoms develop; Other SES: diplopia, blurred vision, photosen-
sitivity, tremor, agit ation, vomiting, aplastic anaemia.
Levetiracetam: Initially 250mg/24h, increase by 250mg/12h every 2wks up to max 
1 . 5g/12h (if eGFR >80). SE: psychiatric side-eff ects are common, eg depression, agi-
tation. Other SES: D&V, dyspepsia, drowsiness, diplopia, blood dyscrasias.
Sodium valproate: Initially 300mg/12h, increase by 100mg/12h every 3d up to max 
30mg/kg (or 2 . 5g) daily. SE: teratogenic. Nausea is very common (take with food). 
Other SES: liver failure (watch LFT especially during 1st 6 months), pancreatitis, hair 
loss (grows back curly), oedema, ataxia, tremor, thrombocytopenia, encephalopa-
thy (hyperammonaemia).
Phenytoin: No longer 1st line due to toxicity (nystagmus, diplopia, tremor, dys-
arthria, ataxia) and  SE: intellect, depression, coarse facial features, acne, gum 
hyper trophy, polyneuropathy, blood dyscr asias. Blood levels required for dosage.
Carbamazepine, phenytoin, and barbiturates are liver enzyme inducing.
Epilepsy and pregnancy
Epilepsy carries a 5% risk of fetal abnormalities, so good seizure control prior to 
conception and during pregnancy is vital. Yet some anti-epileptics are teratogenic: 
the patient must be given accurate information and counselling about contracep-
tion, conception, pregnancy, and breastfeeding in order to make informed deci-
sions. In particular:
  • Advise women of child-bearing age to take folic acid 5mg/d.
  • Strictly avoid sodium valproate and polytherapy prior to conception and during 

pregnancy (lamotrigine is preferred but transition needs to be planned).

  • Advise  that  most  AEDS  except  carbamazepine  and  valproate  are  present  in 

breast milk. Lamotrigine is not thought to be harmful to infants.

  • Discuss  contraceptive  methods,  bearing  in  mind  that:  enzyme-inducing  AEDS 
make  progesterone-only  contraception  unreliable,  and  oestrogen-containing 
contraceptives lower lamotrigine levels—an increased dose may be needed to 
achieve seizure control.

_OHCM_10e.indb   493

_OHCM_10e.indb   493

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

494

Parkinsonism

This is the extrapyramidal triad of:
1      Tremor. Worse at rest; often ‘pill-rolling’ of thumb over ﬁ ngers 

(see p468).

2      Hypertonia. Rigidity + tremor gives ‘cogwheel rigidity’, felt by 

the examiner during rapid pronation/supination.

3      Bradykinesia. Slow to initiate movement; actions slow and de-
crease in amplitude with repetition, eg  blink rate, micrographia. 
Gait is festinant (shuffl  ing, pitched forward, ﬁ g 10.25) with  arm-
swing and freezing at obstacles or doors (due to poor simulta-
neous motor and cognitive function). Expressionless face.

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.25  ‘Marche à petit pas.’

Causes
Parkinson’s disease (PD): Loss of dopaminergic neurons 
in  the  substantia  nigra,  associated  with  Lewy  bodies  in  the  basal  ganglia,  brain-
stem, and cortex. Most cases are sporadic, though multiple genetic loci have been 
identiﬁ ed in familial cases. Mean age at onset is 60yrs. Prevalence:  with age: 3.5% 
at 85–89yrs. Clinical features: The parkinsonian triad, plus non-motor symptoms 
such  as:  autonomic  dysfunction  (postural  hypotension,  constipation,  urinary  fre-
quency/urgency, dribbling of saliva), sleep disturbance, and reduced sense of smell. 
Neuropsychiatric complications, such as depression, dementia, and psychosis, are 
common and debilitating. Diagnosis: Is clinical and based on the core features of 
bradykinesia with resting tremor and/or hypertonia; cerebellar disease and fronto-
temporal dementia should be excluded; a clinical response to dopaminergic therapy 
is supportive. Signs are invariably worse on one side—if symmetrical look for other 
causes. If an alternative cause is suspected then consider MRI to rule out structural 
pathology. Functional neuroimaging (DaTscan™,  PET) is playing an emerging role. 
Treatment:  Focuses  on  symptom  control  and  does  not  slow  disease  progression 
(see BOX). Non-pharmacological options include deep brain stimulation (DBS, may help 
those who are partly dopamine-responsive) and surgical ablation of overactive basal 
ganglia circuits (eg subthalamic nuclei).
Parkinson’s plus syndromes Pro gressive supranuclear palsy: (PSP, Steele–Rich-
ardson–Olszewski syndrome.) Early postural instability, vertical gaze palsy ± falls; 
rigidity of trunk  >limbs; symmetrical onset; speech and swallowing problems; little 
tremor. Multiple system atrophy: (MSA; Shy–Drager.) Early autonomic features, eg 
impotence/incontinence, postural BP; cerebellar + pyr amidal signs; rigidity > tremor. 
Cortico-basal  degeneration:  (CBD.)  Akinetic  rigidity  involving  one  limb;  cortical 
sensory loss (eg astereognosis); apraxia (even autonomous interfering activity by 
aff ected limb—the ‘alien limb’ phenomenon). Lewy body dementia: See p486.

Secondary causes Vascular parkinsonism: (2.5–5% of parkinsonism, also called 
‘lower limb’ parkinsonism). Eg diabetic/hypertensive patient with postural instabil-
ity and falls (rather than tremor, bradykinesia, and festination). Other secondary 
causes: Drugs (neuroleptics, metoclopramide, prochlor pera zine), toxins (manganese), 
Wilson’s disease (p285), trauma (dementia pugilistica), encephalitis, neurosyphilis.
Management Requires input of a a multidis ciplinary team (GP, neurologist, nurse 
specialist, social worker, carers, physio- and occupational therapist) to boost quality 
of life. Assess disability and cognition objectively and reg ularly, and monitor mood—
depression is common. Involve palliative care services early on. Postural exercises 
and weight lifting may help. Don’t forget the carers (p487): off er respite care. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   494

_OHCM_10e.indb   494

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

495

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Pharmacological therapy in Parkinson’s disease
A  key  decision  is  when  to  start  supplementation  of  dopaminergic  signalling 
with  levodopa.  Effi  cacy  of  this  therapy  reduces  with  time,  requiring  larger  and 
more  frequent  dosing,  with  worsening  SEs  and  response  ﬂ uctuations  (such  as 
unpredictable  freezing  and  pronounced  end-of-dose  reduced  response:  ~50%  at 
6yrs). Starting late may therefore be wise, eg when >70yrs or when PD seriously 
interferes  with  life:  discuss  pros  and  cons  with  the  patient.  Do  not  withdraw 
medication suddenly—risks acute akinesia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Be 
aware of situations where malabsorption could also have this eff ect (eg abdominal 
surgery, gastroenteritis).
Levodopa: Dopamine precursor, given combined with a dopa-decarboxylase inhibi-
tor in co-beneldopa or co-careldopa. SES: dyskinesia, painful dystonia. Non-motor 
SES:  psychosis;  visual  hallucinations,  nausea  and  vomiting  (give  domperidone). 
Modiﬁ ed-release preparations should only be used in late disease.
Dopamine  agonists  (DAS):  Ropinirole  and  pramipexole  monotherapy  can  delay 
starting levodopa in early stages of PD, and allow lower doses of levodopa as PD 
progresses. Rotigotine transdermal patches are available as mono- or additive. 
SES: drowsiness, nausea, hallucinations, compulsive behaviour (gambling, hyper-
sexuality,  p449).  Ergot-derived  DA-agonists  ( bromocriptine,  pergolide,  cabergo-
line) can cause ﬁ brotic reactions, and are not favoured.  Amantadine (weak DA) is 
used for drug-induced dyskinesias in late PD.
Apomorphine: Potent DA agonist used with continuous SC infusion to even out end-
of-dose eff ects, or as a rescue-pen for sudden ‘off ’ freezing. SE: injection-site ulcers.
Anticholinergics: (Eg benzhexol, orphenadrine.) Cause confusion in the elderly 
and have multiple SES—limit to younger patients (but not 1st line).
MAO-B inhibitors: (Eg rasagiline, selegiline.) An alternative to dopamine agonists 
in early PD. SEs include postural hypotension and atrial ﬁ brillation.
COMT  inhibitors: (Eg entacapone, tolcapone.) May help motor complications in 
late disease. Lessen the ‘off ’ time in those with end-of-dose wearing off . Tolcapone 
has better effi  cacy, but may cause severe hepatic complications and requires close 
monitoring of LFT. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   495

_OHCM_10e.indb   495

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

496

Multiple sclerosis (MS)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Inﬂ ammatory plaques of demyelination in the CNS disseminated in space and time; 
ie  occuring  at  multiple  sites,  with  ≥30d  in  between  attacks.  Demyelination  heals 
poorly, eventually causing axonal loss;  >80% of patients develop progressive disabil-
ity. The exact cause of the disease remains unknown; it is most likely a combination 
of genetic and environmental factors. There is >30% concordance in identical twins, 
and  unusual  geographical  distribution,  with  increasing  incidence  with  latitude  in 
some parts of the world (NB: adult migrants take their risk with them; children ac-
quire the risk of where they settle)—leading to hypotheses of the roles of vitamin D 
and infection. Mean age of onset is 30yrs. : ≥3:1.
Presentation Usually monosymptomatic: ~20% present with unilateral optic neuri-
tis (pain on eye movement and rapid central vision). Corticospinal tract and bladder 
involvement are also common, and symptoms may worsen with heat (eg hot bath or 
exercise). Other symptoms/signs see table 10.8.
Diagnosis This is clinical, made by a consultant neurologist using established crite-
ria (eg McDonald, see table 10.9) and after alternative diagnoses have been excluded. 
Early diagnosis and treatment reduce relapse rates and disability so refer to neu-
rology as soon as MS is suspected.
Tests Depending on presenting symptoms, some patients may need extra support-
ing  information  to  make  a  diagnosis  (as  per  the  McDonald  criteria).  MRI: Sensi-
tive but not sp e ciﬁ c for plaque detection. It may also exclude other causes, eg cord 
compression. CSF: Oligoclonal bands of IgG on electrophoresis that are not present 
in  serum  suggest  CNS  inﬂ am mation.  Delayed  visual,  auditory,  and  somatosensory 
evoked potentials.
Progression Most patients follow a relapsing-remitting course, with initial recov-
ery  in  between  relapses.  With  time,  remission  becomes  incomplete,  so  disability 
accumulates (secondary progression). 10% of patients display steadily progressive 
disability in the absence of relapses (primary progressive MS), while a minority of pa-
tients experience no progressive disablement at all. Poor prognostic signs: Older ; 
motor signs at onset; many early relapses; many MRI lesions; axonal loss. Pregnancy: 
Does not alter the rate of progression: relapses may reduce during pregnancy and 
increase 3–6 months afterwards, but return to their previous rate thereafter.
Management As with all neurological conditions, requires the coordinated care of a 
multidis ciplinary team and full involvement of the patient in all decisions.8
Lifestyle advice: Regular exercise, stopping smoking and avoiding stress may help.
Disease-modifying  drugs: Dimethyl fumarate is an option for mild/moderate re-
lapsing-remitting MS. The monoclonal antibodies alemtuzumab (acts against T cells) 
and natalizumab (acts against VLA-4 receptors that allow immune cells to cross the 
blood–brain barrier) are also approved for relapsing-remitting disease. Interferon 
beta and glatiramer are not recommended by NICE on the balance of clinical and 
cost-eff ectiveness. Azathioprine is not recommended due to its SE proﬁ le.
Treating relapses: Methylprednisolone, eg 0.5–1g/24h IV/PO for 3–5d shortens acute 
relapses; use sparingly ( twice/yr; steroid SE, p377). It doesn’t alter overall prognosis.
Symptom  control: Spasticity:  off er  baclofen  or  gabapentin.  Tizanidine  or  dant-
rolene are 2nd line; if these fail consider benzodiazepines. Tremor: botulinum toxin 
type A injections improve arm tremor and functioning.  Urgency/frequency: if post-
micturition residual urine >100mL, teach intermittent self-catheterization; if <100mL, 
try tolterodine. Fatigue: amantadine, CBT, and exercise may help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   496

_OHCM_10e.indb   496

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

497

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Table 10.8  Clinical features of MS

Sensory: 

Motor:

Sexual/GU:

 •Dysaesthesia
 •Pins and needles
 •Vibration sense
 •Trigeminal neuralgia

 •Spastic weakness
 •Myelitis
 •Erectile dysfunction
 •Anorgasmia; urine 
ret ention; inconti-
nence

GI: Swallowing disorders; constipation.
Eye:  Diplopia;  hemianopia;  optic  neuritis;  visual 
phe nomena (eg on exercise); bilateral inter nuclear 
ophthalmoplegia (p73); pupil defects.
Cerebellum: Trunk and limb ataxia; intention 
trem or; scanning (ie monotonous) speech; falls.
Cognitive/visuospatial  decline:  A  big  cause 
of  un employment,  accidents,  amnesia,  mood, 
executive functioning.

NB T°, malaise, nausea, vomiting, positional vertigo, seizures, aphasia, meningism, 
bilateral optic neuritis, CSF leucocytosis and CSF protein are rare in MS, and may suggest 
non-MS recurrent demyelinating disease, eg vasculitis or sarcoidosis.

Diagnostic criteria for MS
Table 10.9  McDonald criteria for diagnosing MS (2010)
Clinical presentation 
≥2 attacks (relapses) with ≥2 
objective clinical lesions

Additional evidence needed for diagnosis
None

≥2 attacks with 1 objective clinical 

lesion 

1 attack with ≥2 objective clinical 

lesions

1  attack  with  1  objective  clinical 
lesion  (monosymptomatic  pres-
entation)

Insidious neurological progression 
suggestive of primary progres-
sive MS

• MRI: spatially disseminated lesions, or • +ve CSF 
and ≥2 MRI lesions, or • 2nd attack at a new site
Dissemination in time: • new lesion on repeat MRI 
after >3 months or •  2nd attack
Dissemination in space: • MRI or +ve CSF if ≥2 MRI 
lesions consistent with MS • and dissemination in 
time (by MRI or a 2nd clinical attack)
+ve CSF and dissemination in space on  MRI/VEP
or continued progression for ≥1yr

A careful history may reveal past episodes, eg brief unexplained visual loss, and 
detailed examination may show more than 1 lesion.
Attacks must last >1h, with >30d between attacks.

Six MS eponyms
Devic’s syndrome: (=Neuromyelitis optica, NMO.) MS variant with transverse my-
elitis, (loss of motor, sensory, autonomic, reﬂ ex, and sphincter function below the 
level of a lesion), optic atrophy, and anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies (p698).
Lhermitte’s sign: Neck ﬂ exion causes ‘electric shocks’ in trunk/limbs. (Also +ve in 
cervical spondylosis, cord tumours and B12.)
Uhthoff’s phenomenon: Worsening of symptoms with heat, eg in bath.
Charles Bonnet syndrome: (Rare.) Acuity/temporary blindness ± complex visual 
hallucinations of faces, as well as animals, plants, and trees.
Pulfrich effect: Unequal eye latencies, causing disori e ntation in traffi  c as straight  
trajectories seem curved and distances are misjudged on looking sideways.
Argyll Robert son pupil: See p72.

_OHCM_10e.indb   497

_OHCM_10e.indb   497

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

498

Space-occupying lesions (SOL)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Signs •ICP: (See p830.) Headache worse on waking, lying down, bending forward, or 
with coughing (p456); vomiting; papilloedema (only in 50% of tumours); GCS.
  • Seizures: Seen in ≤50%. Exclude SOL in all adult-onset seizures, especially if focal, or 

with a localizing aura or post-ictal weakness (Todd’s palsy, p712).

  • Evolving focal neurology: See BOX for localizing signs. ICP causes false localizing 

signs: VIth nerve palsy is commonest (p70) due to its long intracranial course.

  • Subtle personality change: Irritability, lack of application to tasks, lack of initia-

tive, socially inappropriate behaviour.

Causes  Tumour  (primary  or  metastatic,  later  in  topic),  aneurysm,  abscess  (25% 
multiple); chronic subdural haematoma, granuloma (p197, eg tuberculoma), cyst (eg 
cysticercosis). Tumours: 30% are metastatic (eg breast, lung, melanoma). Prima-
ries: astrocytoma, glioblastoma multiforme, oligo dendro glioma, ependymoma. Also 
meningioma, primary CNS lymphoma (eg as non-infectious manifestation of HIV), and 
cerebellar haemangio blastoma.
Diff  erentials Stroke, head injury, venous sinus thrombosis, vasculitis, MS, encephali-
tis, post-ictal, metabolic, or idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
Tests CT ± MRI (good for posterior fossa masses). Consider biopsy. Avoid LP before 
imaging (risks coning, ie cerebellar tonsils herniate through the foramen magnum).
Tumour  management  Benign:  Remove  if  possible  but  some  may  be  inaccessi-
ble. Malignant: Excision of gliomas is hard as resection margins are rarely clear, 
but surgery does give a tissue diagnosis, it debulks pre-radiotherapy, and makes a 
cavity for inserting carmustine wafers (delivers local chemotherapy). If a tumour 
is inaccessible but causing hydrocephalus, a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt can help. 
Chemo-radiotherapy is used post-op for gliomas or metastases, and as sole therapy 
if surgery is impossible. Oligodendroglioma with 1p/19q deletions is especially sensi-
tive. In glioblastoma, temozolomide (alkylating agent) survival. Seizure prophylaxis 
(eg pheny toin) is important, but often fails. Treat headache (eg codeine 60mg/4h PO). 
Cerebral oedema: Dexamethasone 4mg/8h PO; mannitol if ICP acutely (p831). Plan 
meticulous palliative treatment (p534).
Prognosis Poor but improving (<50% survival at 5yrs) for CNS primaries; 40% 20yr 
survival for cerebellar haemangio blastoma; benign tumours are curable by excision.
Third-ventricle colloid cysts These congenital cysts declare themselves in adult 
life with amnesia, headache (often positional), obtundation (blunted consciousness), 
incontinence,  dim  vision,  bilateral  paraesthesiae,  weak  legs,  and  drop  attacks. 
: Excision or ventriculo-peritoneal shunting.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension 

Think of this in those presenting as if with a mass (headache, ICP, and papilloede-
ma)—when none is found. Most commonly seen in obese females in 3rd decade, who 
present with narrowed visual ﬁ elds, blurred vision ± diplopia, VIth nerve palsy, and 
an enlarged blind spot, if papilloedema is present (it usually is). Consciousness and 
cognition are preserved.
Associations Endocrine abnormalities (Cushing’s syndrome, hypoparathyroidism, 
TSH), SLE, CKD, IDA, PRV, drugs (tetracycline, steroids, nitrofurantoin, and oral con-
traceptives).
Management Weight loss, acetazolamide or topiramate, loop diuretics, and predni-
solone (start at ~40mg/24h PO; more SE than diuretics). Consider optic nerve sheath 
fenestration or lumbar–peritoneal shunt if drugs fail and visual loss worsens. 
Prognosis Often self-limiting. Permanent signiﬁ cant visual loss in 10%. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   498

_OHCM_10e.indb   498

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Localizing features 
Temporal  lobe:  •Dysphasia  (p86).  •Contralateral  homonymous  hemi anopia  (or 
upper  quadrantanopia  if  only  Meyer’s  loop  aff ected).  •Amnesia. •Many  odd  or 
seemingly inexplicable phenomena, p491.
Frontal  lobe:  •Hemiparesis. •Personality change (indecent, indolent, indiscreet, 
facetious, tendency to pun). •Release phenomena such as the grasp reﬂ ex (ﬁ ngers 
drawn across palm are grasped), signiﬁ cant only if unilateral. •Broca’s dysphasia 
(p86), or more subtle diffi  culty with initiating and planning speech with intact rep-
etition and no anomia—but loss of coherence. •Unilateral anosmia (loss of smell). 
•Perseveration (unable to switch from one line of thinking to another). •Executive 
dysfunction (unable to plan tasks). •Verbal ﬂ uency.
Parietal lobe: •Hemisensory loss. •2-point discrimination. •Astereognosis (un-
able  to  recognize  an  object  by  touch  alone).  •Sensory  inattention.  •Dysphasia 
(p86). •Gerstmann’s syndrome (p700).
Occipital lobe: •Contralateral visual ﬁ eld defects. •Palinopsia (persisting images 
once the stimulus has left the ﬁ eld of view). •Polyopia (seeing multiple images).
Cerebellum: Remember DANISH: dysdiadochokinesis (impaired rapidly alternating 
movements, p67) and dysmetria (past-pointing); ataxia (limb/truncal—but if truncal 
ataxia is worse on eye closure, blame the dorsal columns); nystagmus; intention 
tremor; slurred speech (dysarthria); hypotonia.
Cerebellopontine angle: (Eg acoustic neuroma/vestibular Schwannoma; p462.) 
Ipsi lateral deafness, nystagmus, corneal reﬂ ex, facial weakness (rare), ipsilateral 
cerebellar signs (above), papilloedema, VIth nerve palsy (p70).
Midbrain: (Eg pineal tumours or midbrain infarction.) Failure of up or down gaze; 
light-near dissociated pupil responses (p72), nystagmus on convergent gaze.

499

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

_OHCM_10e.indb   499

_OHCM_10e.indb   499

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

500

Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial nerve palsy)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Aff ects 15–40/100 000/yr,  ≈ . Risk  in pregnancy (≈3) and in diabetes (≈5).
Clinical features Abrupt onset (eg overnight or after a nap) with complete unilat-
eral facial weakness at 24–72h; ipsilateral numbness or pain around the ear; taste 
(ageusia); hyper sens itivity to sounds (from stapedius palsy). On examination the pa-
tients will be unable to wrinkle their forehead, conﬁ rming LMN pathology (see p70), 
or whistle (tests buccinator). Other symptoms of  VIIth palsy (from any cause): 
• Unilateral sagging of the mouth.• Drooling of saliva. • Food trapped between gum 
and cheek. • Speech diffi  culty. • Failure of eye closure may cause a watery or dry eye, 
ectropion (sagging and turning-out of the lower lid), injury from foreign bodies, or 
conjunctivitis.
Other  causes  of  VIIth  palsy  Account  for  ~30%  of  facial  palsies.  Think  of  these 
if: rashes, bilateral symptoms, UMN signs, other cranial nerve involvement, or limb 
weakness. Infective:  Ramsay Hunt syndrome (BOX), Lyme disease, meningitis,  TB, 
viruses (HIV, polio). Brainstem lesions: Stroke, tumour, MS. Cerebellopontine angle 
tumours: Acoustic neuroma, meningioma. Systemic disease: DM, sarcoidosis, Guil-
lain–Barré. Local disease: Orofacial granulomatosis, parotid tumours, otitis media or 
cholesteatoma, skull base trauma.
Lyme disease, Guillain–Barré, sarcoid, and trauma often cause bilateral weakness.
Tests Rule out the other causes: Blood: ESR; glucose;  Borrelia antibodies in Lyme 
disease,  VZV antibodies in Ramsay Hunt syndrome (BOX). CT/MRI: Space-occupying 
lesions; stroke; MS; CSF: (Rarely done) for infections.
Prognosis  Incomplete  paralysis  without  axonal  degen eration  usually  recovers 
completely within a few weeks. Of those with complete paralysis ~80% make a full 
spontaneous recovery, but ~15% have axonal degeneration (~50% in pregnancy) in 
which case recovery is delayed, starting after ~3 months, and may be comp licated 
by aberrant reconnect ions: synkinesis, eg eye blinking causes synchronous upturn-
ing  of  the  mouth;  misconnection  of  parasympathetic  ﬁ bres  (red  in  ﬁ g  10.26)  can 
produce crocodile tears (gusto–lacrimal reﬂ ex) when eating stim ulates unilateral 
lacrimation, not salivation.
Management Drugs: If given within 72h of onset, prednisolone (eg 60mg/d PO for 
5d, tailing by 10mg/d) speeds recovery, with 95% making a full recovery. Antivirals 
(eg aciclovir) don’t help; although some cases are thought to be associated with 
HSV–1, no one has shown actively replicating virus. There are little data to guide treat-
ment if presenting after 72h of onset, but cortico steroids are widely used (though SE, 
p377). No advice on the use of steroids is universally agreed in pregnancy. Protect 
the eye: • Dark glasses and artiﬁ cial tears (eg hypro mellose) if evidence of drying. 
• Encourage regular eyelid closure by pulling down the lid by hand. • Use tape to 
close the eyes at night. Surgery: Consider if eye closure remains a long-term prob-
lem (lagophthalmos) or ectropion is severe. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   500

_OHCM_10e.indb   500

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

501

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

8      Sphenopalatine ganglion
9      Superior maxillary nerve
10      Lacrimal gland
11      Large deep petrosal 

16      Chorda tympani
17      Auricular branch
18      Stylomastoid foramen
19      Lingual nerve—

nerve

12      Vidian nerve
13      Nose/palate gland nerves
14      Small petros al nerve at 
geniculate ganglion

and taste VII and 
gener al sensory from 
tongue (V3)

20      Submandibular gan-
glion (and gland, 21)

1      Facial  nerve  nucleus, 
deep in reticular form-
ation of lower pons
2      Spinal nucleus of V
3      Superior salivary nuc.
4      Solitary tract
5      Porus acusticus 

internus

15      Stapedial nerve

6      Meatal foramen
7      Large petrosal nerve
Fig  10.26  Facial  nerve  branches.  The  motor  part  moves  the  muscles  of  the  face,  scalp,  and 
ears—also buccinator (puff s out the cheeks), platysma, stapedius, and the posterior belly of the 
digastric.  It  also  contains  the  sympathetic  motor  ﬁ bres  (vasodilator)  of  the  submaxillary  and 
sublingual glands (via the chorda tympani nerve). The sensory part contains the ﬁ bres of taste 
for the anterior ⅔ of the tongue and a few somatic sensory ﬁ bres from the middle ear region.

22      Sublingual gland

Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Latent varicella zoster virus reactivating in the geniculate ganglion of the VIIth 
cranial nerve. Symptoms: Painful vesicular rash on the auditory canal ± on drum, 
pinna, tongue palate, or iris (hyphaema, ie blood under the cornea) with ipsilat-
eral facial palsy, loss of taste, vertigo, tinnitus, deafness, dry mouth and eyes. The 
rash may be subtle or even absent (‘herpes sine herpete’=herpes without herpes). 
Incidence: ~5/100 000 (higher if >60yrs). Diagnosis: Clinical, as antiviral treatment 
is thought to be most eff ective within the 1st 72h, while the virus is replicating. 
: Antivirals (eg aciclovir 800mg PO 5 ≈ daily for 7d) + prednisolone, as for Bell’s 
palsy. Prognosis: If treated within 72h, ~75% recover well; if not, ~ ⅓ make a good 
recovery, ⅓ a reasonable recovery, and ⅓ a poor recovery.

_OHCM_10e.indb   501

_OHCM_10e.indb   501

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

502

Mononeuropathies

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Lesions of individual peripheral or cranial nerves. Causes are usually local, such as 
trauma, or entrapment (eg tumour), except for carpal tunnel syndrome (see BOX ‘Car-
pal tunnel syndrome’).
Median nerve C6–T1 The median nerve is the nerve of precision grip—muscles in-
volved are easier to remember if you use your ‘LOAF’ (two lumbricals, opponens pol-
licis, abductor pollicis brevis, and flexor pollicis brevis). The clinical features depend 
on the location of the lesion: At the wrist: (Eg see BOX ‘Carpal tunnel syndrome’.) 
Weakness of abductor pollicis brevis and sensory loss over the radial 3½ ﬁ ngers and 
palm. Anterior interosseous nerve lesions: (Eg trauma.) Weakness of ﬂ exion of the 
distal phalanx of the thumb and index ﬁ nger. Proximal lesions: (Eg compression at 
the elbow.) May show combined defects.
Ulnar  nerve  C7–T1  Vulnerable  to  elbow  trauma.  Signs:  Weakness/wasting  of 
medial (ulnar side) wrist ﬂ exors, interossei (cannot cross the ﬁ ng ers in the good 
luck sign), and medial two lumbricals (claw hand, more marked in wrist lesions with 
digitorum profundus intact); hypothenar emin ence wasting, weak 5th digit abduction, 
and 4th and 5th DIP joint ﬂ exion; sensory loss over medial 1½ ﬁ ngers and ulnar side of 
the hand. Treatment: see BOX ’Managing ulnar mononeuropathies from entrapments’.
Radial nerve C5–T1 This nerve opens the ﬁ st. It may be damaged by compression 
against the humerus. Signs: Test for wrist and ﬁ nger drop with elbow ﬂ exed and 
arm pronated; sensory loss is variable—the dorsal aspect of the root of the thumb 
(the  anatomical  snuff   box)  is  most  reliably  aff ected.  Muscles  involved:  (‘BEAST’) 
brachioradialis; extensors; abductor pollicis longus; supinator; triceps.
Brachial plexus Pain/paraesthesiae and weakness in the aff ected arm in a vari-
able  distribution.  Causes:  Trauma,  radiotherapy  (eg  for  breast  carcinoma),  pro-
longed wearing of a heavy rucksack, cervical rib, thoracic outlet compression (also 
aff ects vasculature), or neuralgic amyotrophy (Parsonage–Turner syndrome: uni-
lateral sudden, severe pain, followed over hours by profound weakness, resolv-
ing completely over days. May rarely involve the phrenic or lower cranial nerves.)
Phrenic nerve C3–5 C3, 4, 5 keeps the diaphragm alive: lesions cause orthopnoea 
with a raised hemidiaphragm on CXR. Causes: Lung cancer, TB, paraneopl astic syn-
dromes, myeloma, thymoma, cervical spondylosis/trauma, thoracic surgery, infec-
tions (HZV, HIV, Lyme disease), muscular dystrophy.
Lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh L2–L3 Meralgia paraesthetica is antero-
lateral burning thigh pain from entrapment under the inguinal ligament.
Sciatic nerve L4–S3 Damaged by pelvic tumours or fractures to pelvis or femur. 
Lesions  aff ect  the  hamstrings  and  all  muscles  below  the  knee  (foot  drop),  with 
loss of sensation below the knee laterally.
Common  peroneal  nerve  L4–S1  Originates  from  sciatic  nerve  just  above  knee. 
Often damaged as it winds round the ﬁ bular head (trauma, sitting cross-legged). 
Signs: Foot drop, weak ankle dorsiﬂ exion/eversion, sensory loss over dorsal foot.
Tibial  nerve  L4–S3  Originates  from  sciatic  nerve  just  above  knee.  Lesions  lead 
to an inability to stand on tiptoe (plantarﬂ exion), invert the foot, or ﬂ ex the toes, 
with sensory loss over the sole.
Mononeuritis  multiplex  Describes  the  involvement  of  two  or  more  peripheral 
nerves. Causes tend to be systemic:  DM, connective tissue disorders (rheumatoid, 
SLE),  vasculitis  (granulomatosis  with  polyangiitis  formerly  Wegener’s  granuloma-
tosis, PAN), and more rarely sarcoidosis, amy loid, leprosy. Electro myography (EMG) 
helps deﬁ ne the anatomic site of lesions.

_OHCM_10e.indb   502

_OHCM_10e.indb   502

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Carpal tunnel syndrome: the commonest mononeuropathy
The median nerve and nine tendons compete for space within the wrist. Compres-
sion is common, especially in women who have narrower wrists but similar-sized 
tendons to men.
Clinical features: Aching pain in the hand and arm (especially at night), and par-
aesthesiae in thumb, index, and middle ﬁ ngers: relieved by dangling the hand over 
the edge of the bed and shaking it (remember ‘wake and shake’). There may be 
sensory loss and weakness of abductor pollicis brevis ± wasting of the thenar emi-
nence. Light touch, 2-point discrimination, and sweating may be impaired.
Causes:  Anything  causing  swelling  or  compression  of  the  tunnel:  myxoedema; 
prolonged  ﬂ exion  (eg  in  a  Colles’  splint);  acromegaly;  myeloma;  local  tumours 
(lipomas, ganglia); rheumatoid arthritis; amyloidosis; pregnancy; sarcoidosis.
Tests: Neurophysiology helps by conﬁ rming the lesion’s site and severity (and like-
lihood of improvement after surgery). Maximal wrist ﬂ exion for 1 min (Phalen’s 
test) may elicit symptoms, and tapping over the nerve at the wrist can induce 
tingling (Tinel’s test) but both are rather non-speciﬁ c.
Treatment: Splinting, local steroid injection ± decomp ression surgery.
NB: There is also tarsal tunnel syndrome: unilateral burning sole pain following 
tibial nerve compression.

503

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Managing ulnar mononeuropathies from entrapments
The  ulnar  nerve asks for trouble in at least ﬁ ve places at the elbow, starting 
proximally at the arcade of Struthers (a musculofascial band ~8cm proximal to 
the medial epicondyle), and ending distally where it exits the ﬂ exor carpi ulnaris 
muscle in the forearm.  Most often, compression occurs at the epicondylar groove 
or at the point where the nerve passes between the two heads of ﬂ exor carpi ul-
naris (true cubital tunnel syndrome). Trauma can easily damage the nerve against 
its bony conﬁ nes (the medial condyle of the humerus—the ‘funny bone’). Normally, 
stretch and compression forces on the ulnar nerve at the elbow are moderated 
by its ability to glide in its groove. When normal excursion is restricted, irritation 
ensues. This may cause a vicious cycle of perineural scarring, consequent loss of 
excursion, and progressive symptoms—without antecedent trauma. Compressive 
ulnar neuropathies at the wrist (Guyon’s canal—between the pisiform and hamate 
bones) are less common, but they can also result in disability.
Treatment  centres  on  rest  and  avoiding  pressure  on  the  nerve,  but  if  symp-
toms  cont inue,  night-time  soft  elbow  splinting  (to  prevent  ﬂ exion  >60°)  is 
warranted.  A  splint  for  the  hand  may  help  prevent  permanent  clawing  of 
the  ﬁ ngers.  For  chronic  neuropathy  associated  with  weakness,  or  if  splint-
ing  fails,  a  variety  of  surgical  procedures  have  been  tried.  For  moderately  se-
vere  neuropathies,  decompressions  in  situ  may  help,  but  often  fail.  Medial 
epicondylectomies  are  eff ective  in  50%  (but  many  will  recur).  Subcutaneous 
nerve re-routing (transposition) may be tried.

_OHCM_10e.indb   503

_OHCM_10e.indb   503

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

504

Polyneuropathies

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Motor and/or sensory disorder of multiple periph eral or cranial nerves: usually sym-
metrical, widespread, and often worse distally (‘glove and stocking’ distribution). 
They can be classiﬁ ed by: chronicity, function (sensory, motor, autonomic, mixed ), 
or pathology (demyelination, axonal degeneration, or both). For example, Guillain–
Barré syndrome (p702) is an acute, predominantly motor, demyelinating neurop athy, 
whereas chronic alcohol abuse leads to a chronic, initially sensory then mixed, axonal 
neuropathy.
Diagnosis The history is vital: be clear about the time course, the precise nature of 
the symptoms, and any preceding or associated events (eg D&V before Guillain–Barré 
syndrome; weight in cancer; arthralgia from a connective tissue disease). Ask about 
travel, alcohol and drug use, sexual infections, and family history. If there is palpable 
nerve  thickening  think  of  leprosy  or  Charcot–Marie–Tooth.  Examine  other  systems 
for clues to the cause, eg alcoholic liver disease.
Tests FBC, ESR, glucose, U&E, LFT, TSH, B12, electrophoresis, ANA, ANCA, CXR, urinalysis, 
consider LP ± speciﬁ c genetic tests for inherited neuropathies, lead level, antigan-
glioside  antibodies.  Nerve  conduction  studies  distinguish  demyelinating  from  ax-
onal causes.
Sensory neuropathy: (Eg DM, CKD, leprosy.) Numbness; pins and needles, paraesthe-
siae; aff ects ‘glove and stocking’ distribution. Diffi  culty handling small objects such 
as  buttons.  Signs  of  trauma  (eg  ﬁ nger  burns)  or  joint  deformation  may  indicate 
sensory loss. Diabetic and alcoholic neuropathies are typically painful.
Motor  neuropathy:  (Eg  Guillain–Barré  syndrome,  lead  poisoning,  Charcot–Marie–
Tooth syndrome.)  Often  progressive  (may  be  rapid);  weak  or  clumsy  hands;  diffi  -
culty  in  walking  (falls,  stumbling);  diffi  culty  in  breathing  (vital  capacity).  Signs: 
LMN lesion: wasting and weakness most marked in the distal muscles of hands and 
feet (foot or wrist drop). Reﬂ exes are reduced or absent.
Cranial nerves: Swallowing/speaking diffi  culty; diplopia.
Autonomic system: See BOX.
Management Treat the cause (table 10.10). Involve physio and OT. Foot care and 
shoe  choice  are  important  in  sensory  neuropathies  to  minimize  trauma.  Splint-
ing joints helps prevent contractures in prolonged paralysis. In Guillain–Barré and 
chronic  inﬂ ammatory  demyelinating  polyradiculoneuropathy  (CIDP:  autoimmune 
demyelination of peripheral nerves), IV immunoglobulin helps. For vasculitic caus-
es, steroids/immuno suppressants may help. Treat neuropathic pain with amitrip-
tyline, duloxetine, gabapentin or pregabalin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   504

_OHCM_10e.indb   504

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Table 10.10  Causes of polyneuropathy

Metabolic
Diabetes mellitus
Renal failure
Hypothyroidism
Hypoglycaemia
Mito chondrial disorders
Infections
Leprosy
HIV
Syphilis
Lyme disease

Vasculitides
Polyarteritis 
nodosa
Rheumatoid 
arthritis 
GPA
Nutritional
Vit B1
Vit B12/folate
Vit B6
Vit E 

Malignancy
Paraneoplastic 
syndromes
Polycythaemia rubra 
vera

Inherited 
syndromes
Charcot–Marie–Tooth
Refsum’s syndrome
Porphyria
Leucodystrophy

Inﬂ ammatory
Guillain–Barré 
syndrome
Sarcoidosis; CIDP*

Drugs
Vincristine
Cisplatin
Isoniazid
Nitrofurantoin
Phenytoin
Metronidazole

Others
Paraproteinaemias, amyloidosis, lead, arsenic
*Chronic  inﬂ ammatory  demyelinating  polyradiculoneuropathy  (CIDP):  autoimmune  demyelination  of 
peripheral nerves (distal onset of weakness/sensory loss in limbs + nerve enlargement +  CSF protein).

505

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Autonomic neuropathy
Sympathetic  and  parasympathetic  neuropathies  may  be  isolated  or  part  of  a 
generalized sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy.
Causes  DM,  amyloidosis,  Guillain–Barré  and  Sjögren’s  syndromes,  HIV,  leprosy, 
SLE,  toxic, genetic (eg porphyria), or paraneoplastic, eg paraneoplastic  encephalo-
myelo neuropathies and Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS, p512).
Signs  Sympathetic:  Postural  hypotension,  sweating,  ejaculatory 
failure, 
Horner’s syndrome (p702). Parasympathetic: Constipation, nocturnal dia rrhoea, 
urine retention, erectile dys function, Holmes–Adie pupil (p72).
Autonomic function tests
• BP: Postural drop of 20/10mmHg is abnormal.
• ECG: A variation of <10bpm with respiration is abnormal (check R-R interval).
•Cystometry: Bladder pressure studies.
• Pupils:  Instil  0.1%  adrenaline  (dilates  if  post-ganglionic  sympathetic  denerva-
tion, not if normal); 2.5% cocaine (dilates if normal; not if sympathetic denerva-
tion);  2.5%  methacholine  (constricts  if  parasympathetic  lesion)—rarely  used. 
• Paraneoplastic  antibodies:  Anti-HU,  anti-YO,  anti-RI,  anti-amphiphysin,  anti-
CV2,  anti-MA2.  Other  Ab:  Antiganglionic  acetylcholine  receptor  antibody  pres-
ence shows that the cause may be autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
Primary autonomic failure Occurs alone (autoimmune autonomic ganglion-
opathy),  as  part  of  multisystem  atrophy  (MSA,  p494), or  with  Parkinson’s  dis-
ease,  typically  in  a  middle-aged/elderly  man.  Onset:  insidious;  symptoms  as 
listed previously.

_OHCM_10e.indb   505

_OHCM_10e.indb   505

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

506

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Motor neuron disease (MND)
MND is a cluster of neurodegenerative diseases aff ecting 6/100 000 (: ≈ 3 : 2), char-
acterized by selective loss of neurons in motor cortex, cranial nerve nuclei, and an-
terior horn cells. Upper and lower motor neurons can be aff ected but there is no 
sensory loss or sphincter disturbance, thus distinguishing MND from MS and poly-
neuropathies. MND never aff ects eye movements, distinguishing it from myasthenia 
(p512). There are four clinical patterns:
1      ALS/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. (Archetypal MND; up to 80%.) Loss of motor 
neurons in motor cortex and the anterior horn of the cord, so combined UMN + LMN 
signs (p446). Worse prognosis if: bulbar onset, age; FVC.

2   Progressive bulbar palsy. (10–20%.) Only aff ects cranial nerves  IX–XII. See  BOX 

‘Bulbar and corticobulbar (‘pseudobulbar’) palsy’.

3   Progressive  muscular  atrophy.  (<10%.)  Anterior  horn  cell  lesion,  so  LMN  signs 

only. Aff ects distal muscle groups before proximal. Better prognosis than ALS.

4   Primary lateral sclerosis. (Rare.) Loss of Betz cells in motor cortex: mainly UMN 
signs, marked spastic leg weakness and pseudobulbar palsy. No cognitive decline.
Presentation Think of MND in those >40yrs (median UK age at onset is 60) with stum-
bling spastic gait, foot-drop ± proximal myopathy, weak grip (door-handles don’t 
turn) and shoulder abduction (hair-washing is hard), or aspiration pneumonia. Look 
for  UMN signs: spasticity, brisk reﬂ exes, plantars; and  LMN signs: wasting, fascic-
ulation of tongue, abdomen, back, thigh. Is speech or swallowing aff ected (bulbar 
signs)? Fasciculation is not enough to diagnose an LMN lesion: look for weakness too. 
Frontotemporal dementia occurs in ~25% (see BOX ‘Dignity and Dignitas’).
Diagnostic criteria (See BOX ‘Revised El Escorial diagnostic criteria for ALS’). There 
is no diagnostic test. Brain/cord MRI helps exclude structural causes, LP helps exclude 
inﬂ ammatory ones, and neurophysiology can detect subclinical denervation and help 
exclude mimicking motor neuropathies.14
Prognosis Poor, <3yrs post onset in half of patients.
Management  Adopt  a  multidisciplinary  approach:  neurologist,  palliative  nurse, 
hosp ice, physio, OT, speech therapist, dietician, social services—all orchestrated by 
the  GP.  Riluzole,  an  inhibitor  of  glutamate  release  and  NMDA  receptor  antagonist, 
is the only medication shown to improve survival. Mulitple other drugs that have 
shown promise in animal models have failed to prove beneﬁ t in clinical trials, includ-
ing  neurotrophic  factors,  anti-apoptotic  agents,  antioxidants,  and  immunomodu-
latory  drugs.  For  supportive/symptomatic  treatment:  Excess  saliva:  Advise  on 
positioning, oral care, and suctioning. Try an antimuscarinic (eg propantheline) or 
glycopyrronium bromide (can be given SC). Botulinum toxin A may help. Dysphagia: 
Blend food. Gastrostomy is an option—discuss early on. Spasticity: Exercise, orthot-
ics. See MS for drugs (p496). Communication difﬁ culty: Provide ‘augmentative and 
alternative’  communication  equipment.  End-of-life  care:  Involve  palliative  care 
team from diagnosis (p532). Consider opioids to relieve breathlessness and discuss  
non-invasive ventilation (see BOX ‘Dignity and Dignitas’). 

14  If no UMN signs and distal arm muscles are aff ected in the distribution of individual nerves, suspect 
multifocal  motor  neuropathy  with  conduction  block  (diagnose  on  nerve  conduction  studies;  :  IV  Ig). 
Gyn aeco mastia, atrophic testes ± infertility suggests Kennedy syndrome (bulbospinal muscular atrophy). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   506

_OHCM_10e.indb   506

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Bulbar and corticobulbar (‘pseudobulbar’) palsy
Bulbar palsy denotes diseases of the nuclei of cranial nerves IX–XII in the medulla. 
Signs: An LMN lesion of the tongue and muscles of talking and swallowing: ﬂ accid, 
fasciculating tongue (like a sack of worms); jaw jerk is normal or absent, speech 
is  quiet,  hoarse,  or  nasal.  Causes:  MND,  Guillain–Barré,  polio,  myasthenia  gravis, 
syringo bulbia (p516), brainstem tumours, central pontine myelinolysis (p672).
Corticobulbar  palsy  UMN  lesion  of  muscles  of  swallowing  and  talking  due  to 
bilateral lesions above the mid-pons, eg corticobulbar tracts (MS, MND, stroke, cen-
tral pontine myelinolysis). It is commoner than bulbar palsy. Signs: Slow tongue 
movements, with slow deliberate speech; jaw jerk; pharyngeal and palatal re-
ﬂ exes; pseudobulbar aff ect (PBA)—weeping unprovoked by sorrow or mood-incon-
gruent giggling (emotional incontinence without mood change is also seen in MS, 
Wilson’s, and Parkinson’s disease, dementia, nitrous oxide use, and head injury). In 
some countries, dextromethorphan + quinidine is licensed for PBA.

Revised El Escorial diagnostic criteria for ALS
Deﬁ nite Lower + upper motor neuron signs in 3 regions.
Probable Lower + upper motor neuron signs in 2 regions.
Probable with lab support Lower + upper motor neuron signs in 1 region, or 
upper motor neuron signs in ≥1 region + EMG shows acute denervation in ≥2 limbs.
Possible Lower + upper motor neuron signs in 1 region.
Suspected Upper or lower motor neuron signs only—in 1 or more regions.

507

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Dignity and Dignitas
ALS  is  closely  linked  with  frontotemporal  dementia  (FTD,  p486)  by  increasing 
clinical,  genetic,  and  molecular  evidence  (nucleotide  repeat  expansions  in  gene 
C9orf72 have been described in familial and sporadic ALS and in FTD). However, pa-
tients with MND often have no cognitive impairment in the early stages of the dis-
ease, and witness their inorexable physical decline with terriﬁ ed awareness. For 
this reason it is imperative to plan for the future early: discuss their wishes for 
end-of-life care and in the eventuality of respiratory decline before it is too late 
for wishes to be communicated. These discussions are crucial but not binding: the 
patient can change their mind at any point, and also refuse any life-prolonging 
treatment,  knowing  the  consequence  is  death.  However,  in  most  countries,  in-
cluding  the  UK,  we  cannot  traverse  that  line  that  lies  between  management  of 
a supported death following withdrawal of life-prolonging (or death-prolonging) 
interventions, and acting with the intention of causing death. Court battles en-
sue, with requests for assisted suicide that may frustrate and challenge ethicists, 
physicians, politicians, and the judiciary, but above all, patients and their families. 
Faced with such conﬂ icting passions, perhaps our role is to be clear that we stand 
beside our patients, come what may.

_OHCM_10e.indb   507

_OHCM_10e.indb   507

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

508

Cervical spondylosis

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Degeneration of the cervical spine with age is inevitable, and has a wide clinical spec-
trum, ranging from asymptomatic to progressive spastic quadriparesis and sensory 
loss due to compression of the cord (myelopathy).
Pathogenesis Degeneration of the annulus ﬁ brosus (the tough coating of the in-
tervertebral discs), combined with osteophyte formation on the adjacent vertebra 
leads to narrowing of the spinal canal and intervertebral foramina (ﬁ gs 10.27, 10.28). 
As the neck ﬂ exes and extends, the cord is dragged over these protruding bony spurs 
anteriorly and indented by a thickened ligamentum ﬂ avum posteriorly.
Presenting complaint Neck stiff ness (but common in anyone >50yrs old), crepitus 
on moving neck, stabbing or dull arm pain (brachialgia), forearm/wrist pain.
Signs Limited, painful neck movement ± crepitus (examine gently). Neck ﬂ exion may 
produce tingling down the spine (Lhermitte’s sign, p497). NB: this does not distinguish 
between cord or roots (or both) involvement.
Root  compression  (radiculopathy):  Pain/‘electrical’  sensations in  arms  or  ﬁ ngers 
at  the  level  of  the  compression  (table  10.11),  with  numbness,  dull  reﬂ exes,  LMN 
weakness,  and  eventual  wasting  of  muscles  innervated  by  the  aff ected  root.  NB:  
UMN signs below level of the aff ected root suggests cord compression.
Features of cord compression: Progressive symptoms (eg weak, clumsy hands; 
gait disturbance); UMN leg signs (spastic weakness, plantars); LMN arm signs (wast-
ing, hyporeﬂ exia); incontinence, hesitancy, and urgency are late features.
Which nerve root is aff  ected? See table 10.11.
 MS; nerve root neuroﬁ broma; subacute combined degeneration of the cord (B12); 
compression by bone or cord tumours.
Management  Urgent  MRI and  specialist  referral  guided  by  red  ﬂ ag  symptoms 
(see p542). Bear in mind that although these are stressed in virtually every set of 
guidelines, no two lists are alike and review of evidence suggests that the accuracy 
of these features is low. Don’t make referral decisions based upon the presence 
or absence of a single feature, but use these to inform your judgement. Otherwise: 
give analgesia (as per WHO ladder) and encourage gentle activity. Cervical collars 
may  give  respite  during  brief  periods  of  increased  pain,  but  restrict  mobility,  so 
may  prolong  symptoms:  avoid  where  possible.  If  no  improvement  in  4–6  weeks 
then  MRI  and  consider  neurosurgical  referral  for:  interlaminar  cervical  epidural 
injections,  transforaminal  injections  or  surgical  decompression  (via  anterior  ap-
proach,  eg  discectomy  or  posterior  approach,  eg  laminectomy—ﬁ g  10.29,  or 
laminoplasty—ﬁ g  10.30).  There  is  no  consensus  or  high-quality  evidence  to  guide 
selection of approach or of patients, though interventions may be best reserved for 
those with progressive deterioration, myelopathy causing disabling neurologic deﬁ -
cits, or those at risk for deterioration (eg severe spinal cord compression on MRI). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   508

_OHCM_10e.indb   508

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

509

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Table 10.11  Clinical patterns of nerve root impingement
Typical motor and sensory deﬁ cits from individual root involvement (C5–8)
Nerve root Motor and sensory deﬁ cit
C5  (C4/C5 disc) Weak deltoid & supraspinatus; 
supinator jerks; numb elbow.

Pain pattern
Pain in neck/shoulder that radiates 
down front of arm to elbow.
Pain in shoulder radiating down 
arm below elbow.*

C6  (C5/C6 disc) Weak biceps & brachioradialis; 

biceps jerks; numb thumb & index 
ﬁ nger.

C7  (C6/C7 disc) Weak triceps & ﬁ nger extension; 
triceps jerks; numb middle ﬁ nger.

C8  (C7/T1 disc) Weak ﬁ nger ﬂ exors & small 

muscles of the hand; numb 5th & 
ring ﬁ nger.

Pain in upper arm and dorsal fore-
arm.
Pain in upper arm and medial fore-
arm.

Worrying symptoms: Night pain, weight, fever.
*Passive head turning may exacerbate C6 radicular pain but not carpal tunnel syndrome (Spurling’s 
manoeuvre ).

Fig  10.27  A  T2-weighted  MRI  ( 
CSF looks bright). The cord is com-
pressed 
osteo phytes 
anter iorly and the ligamentum ﬂ a-
vum posteriorly.

between 

Fig  10.28  Cervical  vertebra.  1  Dorsal  root  ganglion; 
2 Dorsal root; 3 Dura mater; 4 Subarachnoid space; 5 Pia 
mater; 6 Grey matter; 7 Spinal nerve; 8 Ventral ramus; 
9 Vertebral artery in the transverse foramen; 10 White 
matter; 11 Ventral spinal nerve.

©Prof P Scally.

Fig 10.29  Laminectomy.

Fig 10.30  Laminoplasty (screws and plates).

_OHCM_10e.indb   509

_OHCM_10e.indb   509

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

510

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Myopathy
Primary disorder of muscle with gradual-onset symmetrical weakness; it may be 
confused clinically with neuropathy. In favour of myopathy: •Gradual onset of sym-
metric proximal weakness—diffi  culty combing hair and climbing stairs (NB: weakness 
is also distal in myotonic dystrophy). •Speciﬁ c muscle groups aff ected (ie selective 
weakness  on  ﬁ rst  presentation).  •Preserved  tendon  reﬂ exes.  •No  paraesthesiae  or 
bladder problems. •No fasciculation (suggests anterior horn cell or root disease).

Rapid  onset  suggests  a  toxic,  drug,  or  metabolic  myopathy  (or  a  neuropathy). 
Excess fatigability (weakness with exercise) suggests myasthenia (p512). Sponta-
neous pain at rest and local tenderness occurs in inﬂ ammatory myopathies. Pain on 
exercise suggests ischaemia or metabolic myopathy (eg McArdle’s disease). Oddly 
ﬁ rm  muscles  (due  to  inﬁ ltrat ions  with  fat  or  connective  tissue)  suggest  pseudo-
hyper tro phic muscular dystroph ies (eg Duchenne’s).
Tests  ESR,  CK,  AST, and  LDH may  be  raised.  Do  EMG  and  tests  relevant  to  systemic 
causes (eg TSH, p216). Muscle biopsy and genetic testing may help reach a diagnosis.
Muscular dystrophies A group of genetic diseases (see table 10.12) with progres-
sive degeneration and weakness of speciﬁ c muscle groups. The primary abnormal-
ity may be in the muscle membrane. There may be unusually ﬁ rm muscles due to 
inﬁ ltrat ion by fat or connective tissue, and marked variation in size of individual 
muscle  ﬁ bres  on  histology.  •  Duchenne’s  muscular  dystrophy:  The  commonest 
(3/1000  male  live  births).  Presents  at  ~4yrs  old  with  clumsy  walking,  then  diffi  -
culty in standing, and respiratory failure. Pseudohypertrophy is seen, especially in 
the calves. Serum creatine kinase  >40-fold. There is no speciﬁ c treatment. Some 
survive beyond 20yrs. Home ventilation improves prognosis. Genetic counselling is 
vital. • Becker’s  muscular  dystrophy: (~0.3/1000  births.) Presents similarly to 
Duchenne’s but with milder symptoms, at a later age, and with a better prognosis. 
• Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystro phy: (FSHD, Landouzy–Dejerine.) Almost as 
common as Duchenne’s. Onset is ~12–14yrs old, with inability to puff  out the cheeks 
and diffi  culty raising the arms above the head. Signs: weakness of face (‘ironed out’ 
expression), shoulders, and upper arms (often asymmetric with deltoids spared), 
foot-drop, scapular winging (ﬁ g 10.31),  scoliosis, anterior axillary folds, and horizon-
tal clavicles. 20% need a wheelchair by 40yrs.
Myotonic disorders Cause tonic muscle spasm (myotonia), and demonstrate long 
chains of central nuclei within muscle ﬁ bres on histology. The commonest is myo-
tonic dystrophy which is, in fact, clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with two 
major forms (DM1 and DM2—see table 10.12), both showing abnormal trinucleotide 
repeat expansions in regulatory (non-coding) genetic regions. DM1 is the commoner, 
more  severe,  and  typically  presents  between  20–40  yrs  old  with  distal  weakness 
(hand/foot drop), weak sternomastoids, and myotonia. Facial weakness and muscle 
wasting give a long, haggard appearance. Also: cataracts, male frontal baldness, 
diabetes, testis/ovary atrophy, cardiomyopathy, and cognition. Most DM1 patients 
die in late middle age of respiratory or cardiac complications. Mexiletine may help 
with disabling myotonia. Genetic counselling is important.
Inﬂ ammatory  myopathies  There  may  be  spontaneous  muscle  pain  at  rest 
and local tenderness on palpation. Inclusion  body  myositis is the chief example 
if  aged  >50yrs.  Weakness  starts  with  quadriceps,  ﬁ nger  ﬂ exors,  or  pharyngeal 
muscles. Ventral extremity muscle groups are more aff ected than dorsal or girdle 
groups. Response to therapy is poor and patients typically progress over a decade 
to require assistance with activites of daily living. Histology shows ringed vacuoles 
+ intranuclear inclusions. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis, see p552.
Metabolic  myopathies  Eg  McArdle’s  disease  (glycogen  storage  disorder).  Pre-
sents with muscle pain and weakness after exercise.
Acquired  myopathies  of  late  onset  Often  part  of  systemic  disease—eg  hyper-
thyroidism, malignancy, Cushing’s, hypo- and hypercalcaemia.
Drug causes Alcohol; statins; steroids; chloroquine; zidovudine; vincristine; cocaine. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   510

_OHCM_10e.indb   510

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

511

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig  10.31  Winging  of  both  scapulae  in  facioscapulohumeral 
muscular dystrophy, due to weakness of thoracoscapular mus-
cles.
Reproduced from Donaghy, Brain’s Diseases of the Nervous System, 
12th edition, with permission from Oxford University Press.

Table 10.12  Genetics of some commoner congenital myopathies
Condition Inheritance Chr Gene
Duchenne’s 
muscular 
dystrophy

X-linked 
recessive

X

Dystrophin (sta-
bilizes muscle 
ﬁ bres) 
Dystrophin

Pathogenesis
Partial deletions or duplications in 
dystrophin render non-functional

Partial deletions or duplications in 
dystrophin render hypo-functional

Becker’s 
muscular 
dystrophy
FSHD 
type 1

FSHD 
type 2

DM 
type 1

DM 
type 2

X-linked 
recessive 

Autosomal 
dominant

Autosomal 
dominant

Autosomal 
dominant

Autosomal 
dominant

X

4

4

19

3

DUX4 (transcrip-
tional activator)

DUX4 (transcrip-
tional activator)

DMPK (serine-
threonine 
kinase)
ZNF9 (transcrip-
tional regulator)

Partial deletion of D4Z4 repeating 
unit releases normal repression of 
DUX4 expression
Hypomethylation of D4Z4 releases 
normal repression of DUX4 expres-
sion
Expansion of short repetitive 
sequences of nucleotides; in both 
forms this expanded sequence is 
transcribed into RNA which then 
misfolds and sequesters other RNA 
binding proteins

_OHCM_10e.indb   511

_OHCM_10e.indb   511

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

512

Myasthenia gravis (MG)

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

MG is an autoimmune disease mediated by antibodies to nicotinic acetylcholine recep-
tors (AChR) on the post-synaptic side of the neuromuscular junction (ﬁ g 10.32). Both B 
and T cells are implicated.
Presentation Slowly increasing or relapsing muscular fatigue. Muscle groups af-
fected, in order: extra ocular; bulbar (swallowing, chew ing); face; neck; limb girdle; 
trunk. Signs: Ptosis, diplopia, myasthenic snarl on smiling, ‘peek sign’ of orbicularis 
fatigability (eyelids begin to separate after manual opposition to sustained closure). 
On counting to 50, the voice fades (dysphonia is a rare presentation). Tendon reﬂ exes 
are normal. Symptoms exacerbated by: Pregnancy, K+, infection, over-treatment, 
change  of  climate,  emotion,  exercise,  gentamicin,  opiates,  tetracycline,  quinine, 
-blockers.
Diff  erentials Polymyositis/other myopathies (p510); SLE; Takayasu’s arteritis (fati-
gability of the extremities); botulism (see BOX).
Associations  Include  autoimmune  disease  (especially  rheumatoid  arthritis  and 
SLE). If <50yrs, it is commoner in  and associated with thymic hyperplasia; >50, it 
is commoner in men, and associated with thymic atrophy or thymic tumour.
Tests  • Antibodies:  Anti-AChR  antibodies  in  90%  (70%  in  MG variant  conﬁ ned  to 
ocular muscles). If anti-AChR Ωve look for MuSK antibodies (muscle-speciﬁ c tyrosine 
kinase; especially  in  ).  • EMG:  Decremental  muscle  response  to  repetitive  nerve 
stimulation ± single-ﬁ bre jitter. • Imaging:  CT to exclude thymoma (68% 5yr sur-
vival).  • Other:  Ptosis  improves  by  >2mm  after  ice  application  to  the  eyelid  for 
>2min—a  neat,  non-invasive  test  (but  not  diagnostic).  The  Tensilon®  (edrophoni-
um) test may not give clear answers and has dangers, so is rarely used.
Treatment • Symptom control: Anticholinesterase, eg pyridostigmine (60–120mg 
PO up to 6≈daily; max 1.2g/d). Cholinergic SE: salivation, lacrimation, sweats, vom-
iting, miosis. Other SE: diarrhoea, colic (controllable with propan the line 15mg/8h). 
• Immunosuppression:  Treat  relapses  with  prednisolone—start  at  5mg  on  alter-
nate  days,    by  5mg/wk  up  to  1mg/kg  on  each  treatment  day.  Dose  on  remis-
sion  (may  take  months).  Give  osteo porosis  prophylaxis.  SE:  weakness  (hence  low 
starting dose). Azathioprine, ciclosporin, and mycophenolate mofetil may also be 
used. • Thymectomy: Has beneﬁ cial eff ects, even in patients without a thymoma: 
consider  especially  in  younger  patients  with  onset <5yrs  previously  and  poor  re-
sponse to medical therapy. A recent randomized controlled trial shows improved 
symptom scores sustained over 3yrs, with reduced need for immunosuppression. 
Surgery also prevents local invasion if thymoma is present.
Myasthenic crisis Life-threatening weakness of respiratory muscles during a re-
lapse. Can be diffi  cult to diff erentiate from cholinergic crisis (ie overtreatment—
but  this  is  rare,  and  usually  only  occurs  in  doses  of  pyridostigmine  >960mg/d). 
Monitor  forced  vital  capacity.  Ventilatory  support  may  be  needed.  Treat  with 
plasmapheresis (removes AChR antibodies from the circulation) or IVIg and identify 
and treat the trigger for the relapse (eg infection, medications).

Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS)

LEMS can be paraneoplastic (50% are associated with malignancies, in particular 
small-cell lung cancer) or autoimmune. Unlike MG, antibodies are to voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels on pre-synaptic memb rane (see ﬁ g 10.33; anti-P/Q type VGCC antibodies 
are +ve in 85–95%).
Clinical features •Gait diffi  culty before eye signs. •Autonomic involvement (dry 
mouth, constipation, impotence). •Hyporeﬂ exia and weakness, which improve after 
exercise. •Dip l opia and respiratory muscle involvement are rare. •EMG shows similar 
changes to MG except amplitude increases greatly post-exercise.
Treatment  Pyridostigmine,  3,4-diaminopyridine  or  IVIg  (get  specialist  help). Do 
regular CXR/high-resolution CT as symptoms may precede the cancer by >4yrs.

_OHCM_10e.indb   512

_OHCM_10e.indb   512

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

How synapses work—the neuromuscular junction
1      Before transmission can occur, neurotransmitter must be packed into synaptic 
vesicles. At the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) this is acetylcholine (ACh). Each 
vesicle contains ~8000 ACh molecules.

2      When an action potential arrives at the pre-synaptic terminal, depolarization 
opens voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (VGCCS). In Lambert–Eaton syndrome, anti-
P/Q type VGCC antibodies disrupt this stage of synaptic transmission.15

3      Inﬂ ux of Ca2+ through the VGCCs triggers fusion of synaptic vesicles with the 
pre-synaptic membrane (a process that botulinum toxin interferes with), and 
neurotransmitter is released from the vesicles into the synaptic cleft.

4      Transmitter  molecules  cross  the  synaptic  cleft  by  diff usion  and  bind  to  re-
ceptors on the post-synaptic membrane, causing depolarization of the post-
synaptic membrane (the end-plate potential). This change in the post-synaptic 
membrane triggers muscle contraction at the NMJ, or onward transmission of 
the  action  potential  in  neurons.  In  myasthenia  gravis,  antibodies  block  the 
post-synaptic ACh receptors, preventing the end-plate potential from becom-
ing large enough to trigger muscle contraction—and muscle weakness ensues.
5      Transmitter action is terminated by enzyme-induced degradation of transmit-
ter  (eg  acetylcholinesterase),  uptake  into  the  pre-synaptic  terminal  or  glial 
cells,  or  by  diff usion  away  from  synapse. Anticholinesterase  treatments  for
myasthenia gravis, such as pyridostigmine, reduce the rate of degradation of 
ACh, increasing the chance that it will trigger an end-plate potential.

513

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig 10.32  Myasthenia gravis features post-synaptic 
AChR  antibodies.  Tendon  reﬂ exes  are  normal  be-
cause the synapses do not have time to become 
fatigued  with  such  a  brief  muscle  contraction. 
Ocular palsies are common (it’s not exactly clear 
why).

Fig 10.33  Lambert–Eaton  syndrome 
fea-
tures  pre-synaptic  Ca2+-channel  antibodies. 
Depressed  tendon  reﬂ exes  are  common, 
because less transmitter is released, but re-
ﬂ exes may  after maximum voluntary con-
traction due to a build of transmitter in the 
synaptic cleft (post-tetanic potentiation). 

15  Disruption of pre-synaptic transmission aff ects release of ACh in autonomic nervous system as well as 
at neuromuscular junction, explaining the prominence of dysautonomia in LEMS unlike in MG.

_OHCM_10e.indb   513

_OHCM_10e.indb   513

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

514

Neuroﬁ bromatosis

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Fig  10.34  Multiple  brown  Lisch 
nodul es on the iris.  ©Jon Miles.

Type 1 neuroﬁ bromatosis (NF1, von Recklinghausen’s disease)
Autosomal dominant inheritance (gene locus 17q11.2). Expression of NF1 is variable, 
even within a family. Prevalence: 1 in 2500, :≈1:1; no racial predilection.
Signs: Café-au-lait spots: ﬂ at, coff ee-coloured patches of skin seen in 1st year of 
life (clearest in UV light), increasing in size and number with age. Adults have ≥6, 
>15mm across. They do not predispose to skin cancer. Freckling: typically in skin-
folds (axillae, groin, neck base, and submammary area), and usually present by age 
10. Dermal neuroﬁ bromas: small, violaceous nodules, 
gelatinous in texture, which appear at puberty, and 
may become papillomatous. They are not painful but 
may itch. Numbers increase with age. Nodular neuro-
ﬁ bromas  arise  from  nerve  trunks.  Firm  and  clearly 
demarcated,  they  can  give  rise  to  paraesthesiae  if 
pressed. Lisch  nodules  (ﬁ g 10.34) are tiny harmless 
regular  brown/trans lucent  mounds  (hamartomas) 
on the iris (use a slit lamp) 2mm in diameter. They 
develop by 6yrs old in 90%. Also short stature and 
macrocephaly.
Complications: Occur in 30%. Mild learning disabil ity is com mon. Local effects of 
neuroﬁ bromas:  nerve root compression (weakness, pain, paraesthesiae); GI—bleeds, 
obstruction; bone—cystic lesions, scoliosis, pseudarth rosis. BP from renal artery ste-
nosis or phaeochromo cytoma. Plexiform neuroﬁ bromas (large, subcutaneous swell-
ings). Malignancy (5% patients with NF1): optic glioma, sarcomatous change in a 
neuroﬁ broma. Epilepsy risk (slight). Rare association: carcinoid syndrome (p271).
Management:  Multidisciplinary  team  with  geneticist,  neur ologist,  surgeon,  and 
physiotherapist, orchestrated by a GP. Yearly cutaneous survey and measurement 
of BP. Dermal neuroﬁ bromas are unsightly, and catch on clothing; if troublesome, 
excise, but removing all lesions is unrealistic. Genetic counselling is vital (OHCS p154).
Type 2 neuroﬁ bromatosis (NF2)
Autosomal dominant inheritance, though 50% are de novo, with mosaicism in some 
(NF2 gene locus is 22q11). Rarer than NF1 with a prevalence of only 1 in 35 000.
Signs: Café-au-lait spots are fewer than in NF1. Bilateral vestibular Schwannomas 
(= acoustic neuromas; p462) are characteristic, becoming symptomatic by ~20yrs old 
when sensorineural hearing loss is the 1st sign. There may be tinnitus and vertigo. 
The rate of tumour growth is unpredictable and variable. The tumours are benign 
but cause problems by pressing on local structures and by ICP. They may be absent 
in mosaic NF2. Juvenile posterior subcapsular lenticular opacity (a form of cata-
ract) occurs before other manifest ations and can be useful in screening those at risk.
Complications: Tender Schwannomas of cranial and peripheral nerves, and spinal 
nerve roots. Meningiomas (45% in NF2, often multiple). Glial tumours are less common. 
Consider NF2 in any young person presenting with one of these tumours in isolation.
Management: Hearing tests yearly from puberty in aff ected families, with MRI brain 
if abnormality is detected. A normal MRI in the late teens is helpful in assessing risk 
to any off spring. A clear scan at 30yrs (unless a family history of late onset) indi-
cates that the gene has not been inherited. Treatment of vestibular Schwannomas is 
neurosurgical and complicated by hearing loss/deterioration and facial palsy. Mean 
survival from diagnosis is ~ 15yrs.
Schwannomatosis  Multiple  tender  cutaneous  Schwannomas  without  the  bilat-
eral vestibular Schwannomas that are characteristic of NF2. Indistinguishable from 
mosaic  NF2,  where  vestibular  Schwannomas  are  also  absent,  except  by  genetic 
analysis of tumour biopsies. There is typically a large tumour load, assessable only 
by whole-body MRI. Mutations in the tumour suppressor genes SMARCB1 and LZTR1 
and spontaneous NF2 mutations have all been described.  Life expectancy is normal.

_OHCM_10e.indb   514

_OHCM_10e.indb   514

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

515

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Diagnostic criteria for neuroﬁ bromatosis

NF1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease):
Diagnosis is made if 2 of the following are found:

1      ≥6 café-au-lait macules >5mm (pre-pubertal) or >15mm (post-pubertal)
2      ≥2 neuroﬁ bromas of any type or 1 plexiform
3      Freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions
4      Optic glioma
5      ≥2 Lisch nodules
6      Distinctive osseous lesion typical of NF1, eg sphenoid dysplasia
7      First-degree relative with NF 1 according to the above-listed criteria.

Differential:  McCune–Albright  syndrome  (OHCS  p650),  multiple  lentigines, 
urticaria pigmentosa.
NF2:
Diagnosis is made if either of the following are found:

1      Bilateral vestibular Schwannomas seen on MRI or CT
2      First-degree relative with NF2, and either:
a) Unilateral vestibular Schwannoma; or
b) One of the following:
  • Neuroﬁ broma
  • Meningioma
  • Glioma
  • Schwannoma
  • Juvenile cataract (NF2 type).
Differential: NF 1, Schwannomatosis.
Causes of café-au-lait spots: Normal (eg up to 5); NF 1 (melanocyte density vs 
‘normal’  café-au-lait  spots);  NF2;  rare  syndromes:  Gaucher’s;  McCune–Albright; 
Russell–Silver; tuberous sclerosis; Wiskott–Aldrich.

_OHCM_10e.indb   515

_OHCM_10e.indb   515

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

516

Syringomyelia

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

A syrinx is a tubular cavity in or close to the central canal of the cervical cord. Mean 
age of onset: 30yrs. Incidence: 8/100 000/yr. Symptoms may be static for years, but 
then worsen fast—eg on coughing or sneezing, as pressure causes extension, eg into 
the brainstem (syringobulbia, see later in topic).
Causes  Typically,  blocked  CSF  circulation  (without  4th  ventricular  communic-
ation),  with  ﬂ ow  from  basal  posterior  fossa  to  caudal  space,  eg  Arnold–Chiari 
malformation (cerebellum herniates through foramen magnum); basal arachnoidi-
tis  (after  infection,  irradiation,  subarachnoid  haemorrhage);  basilar  invagination 
(in which the top of the odontoid process of  C2 migrates upwards, causing fora-
men  magnum  stenosis  ±  medulla  oblongata  compression);  masses  (cysts,  rheu-
matoid pannus, encephalocoele, tumours). Less  commonly, a syrinx may develop 
after  myelitis,  cord  trauma,  or  rupture  of  an  AV  malformation,  or  within  spinal 
tumours  (ependymoma  or  haemangioblastoma)  due  to  ﬂ uid  secreted  from  neo-
plastic cells or haemorrhage.
Signs  Dissociated  sensory  loss  (absent  pain  and  T°  sensation,  with  preserved 
light  touch,  vibration,  and  joint-position  sense)  due  to  pressure  from  the  syrinx 
on the decussating antero lateral pathway (ﬁ g 10.35) in a root dis tribution reﬂ ect-
ing  the  location  of  the  syrinx  (eg  for  typical  cervical  syrinx  then  sensory  loss  is 
over trunk and arms); wasting/weakness of hands ± claw-hand (then armssho-
uldersrespirat ory muscles). Anterior horn cells are also vulnerable. Other signs: 
Horner’s syndrome (can be bilateral and therefore more diffi  cult to spot); UMN leg 
signs;  body  asymm etry,  limb  hemi-
hyper trophy,  or  uni lat eral  odo-  or 
chiromegaly (enlarged hand or foot), 
perhaps from release of trophic fac-
tors  via  anterior  horn  cells;  Char-
cot’s  joints  in  the  shoulder/wrist 
due to lost joint pro prio ception (see 
ﬁ g 5.11, p213).
Syringo bulbia  (Brain stem  involve-
ment.)  Nyst agmus,  tongue  atro-
phy,  dysphagia,  pharyngeal/palatal 
weak ness, Vth nerve sensory loss.
MRI imaging How big is the syrinx? 
Any  base-of-brain  (Chiari)  malfor-
mation?
Surgery  Don’t  wait  for  gross  dete-
rioration to occur. Decompression at 
the  foramen  magnum  may  be  tried 
in  Chiari  malformat ions  to  promote 
free ﬂ ow of CSF, and so prevent  syrinx 
dilatation. Surgery may reduce pain 
and progression.

Fig 10.35  The anterolateral system.

_OHCM_10e.indb   516

_OHCM_10e.indb   516

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

517

l

y
g
o
o
r
u
e
N

Retroviruses and neurology

HIV and AIDS (p398.) Can have multiple neurological manifestations: these conditions 
are part of the diff erential diagnosis of meningitis, intra cranial mass lesions, demen-
tia, encephalomyelitis, cord problems, and peripheral neuropathies.
Acute  infection:  May  be  associated  with  transient  aseptic  meningoencephalitis 
(typically self-limiting), myel opathy, and neuropathy.
Opportunistic infections: Arise during low CD4 counts, which allow unusual or atyp-
ical organisms to infect the nervous system: • Toxoplasma gondii (p400) is the main 
CNS pathogen in AIDS, causing cerebral abscesses which present with focal signs, eg 
seizures, hemiparesis. CT/MRI shows ring-shaped contrast-enhancing lesions. Treat 
with pyrimethamine (+folinic acid) + sulfadiazine or clindamycin for 6 months. Con-
tinue secondary prophylaxis until  CD4  count  >200. Pneumocys tis prophylaxis also 
protects  against  toxoplasmosis. •  Cryptococcus  neo form ans  (ﬁ g  10.36)  causes  a 
chronic meningitis with fever and headache (neck stiff ness may be absent). Cogni-
tion alters slowly, seizures and coma may follow. Treat with amphotericin followed 
by ﬂ uconazole. • Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause encephalopathy. • Progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is caused by the JC virus. There is progres-
sive white matter inﬂ ammation. Mortality even with antiretroviral therapy is around 
50% at 1yr. • Syphilis and TB may also cause meningitis.
Tumours: Aff ecting the CNS include primary cerebral lymphoma (associated with EBV)
and B-cell lymphoma. CSF JC virus PCR is useful in distinguishing PML from lymphoma.
Neuropathies: Common in HIV, and may be a result of the disease itself or antiret-
roviral therapy. Up to 30% of patients have a peripheral neuropathy, which is pain-
ful  and  predominantly  sensory.  Other  clinical  pictures  include  polyradiculopathy, 
mononeuritis multiplex, and proximal myopathy.
Chronic HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND): While antiretroviral ther-
apy (ART) has decreased the incidence of CNS complications in HIV/AIDS, people are 
living longer with the disease, and chronic complications such as HIV-associated de-
mentia are increasing. This occurs in 7–15%, late in the disease, and usually when the 
CD4 count is <200. Progressive behavioural changes are seen along with subcortical 
features: memory loss, poor attention, and bradykinesia. Various encephalopathies 
may also contribute to this, eg PML.
Human T-cell lymphotrophic virus (HTLV-1) Is another retrovirus with neurologi-
cal manifestations, though much more rarely than HIV (~0.5%). It causes: Tropical 
spastic paraplegia, a slowly progressing myelopathy, typically aff ecting the tho-
racic area. There may be paraesthesiae, sensory loss, and disorders of micturition. 
Demyelinating polyneuropathy and ataxia may also occur.

(a)

(b)

Fig 10.36  Cryptococcosis: (a) Chronic meningitis involving the basal leptomeningitis with multiple 
small intraparenchymal cysts seen in the cerebral cortex. (b) Under the microscope we see these 
cysts as dilatation of the perivascular space to form cavities ﬁ lled with colonies of cryptococci, 
which appear as round basophilic structures.

Reproduced from Gray et al., Escourelle and Poirier’s Manual of Basic Neuropathology, 2013,
by permission of Oxford University Press, USA.

_OHCM_10e.indb   517

_OHCM_10e.indb   517

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

11  Oncology and palliative care

Contents
Looking after people with cancer  519
The genetics of cancer  520
Cancer diagnosis  522
Cancer treatment: medicine and 

surgery  524

Cancer treatment: radiotherapy  526
Interventional oncology  527
Oncology emergencies  528
Paraneoplastic syndromes  529
Tumour markers  530
Palliative care:

Principles and pain  532

  Other symptoms  534

Care in the last days of life  536

Fig 11.1  How not to break bad news. The third 
day of admission brings me some examples of 
doctor’s communication skills being the worst 
I could possibly imagine under the most painful 
of circumstances...I’m laid in a hospital bed sob-
bing and scared, about at the most vulnerable 
a patient could be...a young gynaecology SHO I 
have never met enters my room...I can tell he 
has  pulled  the  short  straw...  He  nervously  sits 
down  next  to  me  and  out  of  the  blue,  after  a 
cursory introduction tells me, ‘Your MRI shows 
evidence  of  spread’.  I  am  quite  astounded  at 
the  lack  of  quality  communication  given  the 
circumstances.

The Other Side, by Kate Granger MBE, FRCP, 
1981–2016.

Kate Granger, a medical registrar then consult-
ant geriatrician, was diagnosed with a desmo-
plastic  small  round  cell  tumour  at  the  age  of 
29. This is a cancer that medical science has no 
answer to. But Kate had her own answer. She 
turned her terminal diagnosis on its head and 
began a dialogue on death and dying, off ering 
her  experience  as  an  inspirational  lesson  in 
compassion and care. Before you are a patient, 
before you have cancer, but most importantly, 
before you are a doctor, you are simply a human 
being. And if your humanity is lost or forgotten, 
then  you  cannot  care,  even  if  medical  science 
is able to provide an answer. hellomynameis.org.uk; 
#hellomynameis

Image and text reproduced courtesy of the 
family of Dr Kate Granger, MBE.

We thank Professor Max Watson, our Specialist Reader, for his contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   518

_OHCM_10e.indb   518

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

519

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Looking after people with cancer
Cancer will aff ect 50% of people born after 1960 and >25% of all deaths in the UK 
are from cancer.1 While many may not appreciate the poor prognosis attached 
to diagnoses such as liver failure or heart failure, ‘cancer’ has a widespread as-
sociation with suff ering and death. Yet ‘cancer’ is not a homogenous disease but 
a group of conditions with prognoses ranging from very good (98% 10yr survival 
for testicular cancer) to extremely poor (21% 1yr survival for pancreatic cancer).1
Communication2 is the ﬁ rst step on a cancer pathway and underpins whatever 
that diagnosis may subsequently entail for the individual. A range of overwhelm-
ing feelings can surface upon receiving a cancer diagnosis: shock, numbness, deni-
al, panic, anger, resignation (‘I knew all along…’). Preconceptions, possibly derived 
vicariously from friends and family, may be deeply embedded leading to despair 
or inappropriate optimism. Without an understanding of your patient’s starting 
point, you may fail to be eff ective in your guidance and support.
Tips for the discussion of a cancer diagnosis

1      Set the environment up carefully. Choose a quiet place where you will not be 
disturbed. Make sure family or friends are present according to your patient’s 
wishes. Anticipate likely questions and be sure of your facts.

2      Find out what the patient already knows and believes (often a great deal). 

‘What are you worried about today?’

3      Give some warning: ‘There is some bad news for us to address’.
4      Ascertain how much the person wants to know. ‘Are you someone who likes 
to know all the details about your condition?’ Although information is a prior-
ity for the majority of cancer patients, this may change with the individual, 
and the course of the disease. ‘Monitors’ will seek information, ‘blunters’ will 
distract themselves.

5      Share information about diagnosis and treatments. Speciﬁ cally list support-
ing people (oncology multidisciplinary team) and institutions (hospices). Break 
information down into manageable chunks and check understanding for each.
6      Invite questions patients may feel they cannot ask. ‘Is there anything else you 
want me to explain?’ Do not hesitate to go over the same ground repeatedly. 
Allow denial, don’t force the pace, give time. Listen to any concerns raised, 
encourage the airing of feelings. Empathize.

7      Address prognosis. Be honest. Doctors are often too optimistic. Encourage 
an appropriate level of hope (see BOX ‘Spiritual pain’, p535), refer to an expert.
8      Make a plan. The desire to be involved in decisions about treatment is vari-
able: your patient’s locus of control can be internal (desire control of their 
own destiny) or external (passive acceptance). Decision-making can be im-
mediate, deferred, panicked, or rationally deliberated. Time may be required 
to facilitate any style of decision-making: your plan may be simply to come 
back and talk again.

9      Summarize, and off er availability. Record details of your conversation includ-

ing the language used.

10      Follow through. Leave your patient with the knowledge that you are with 

them, and that your unwritten contract will not be broken.

No rules guarantee success. Use whatever your patient gives you—closely observe 
both verbal and non-verbal cues. Getting to know your patient, seeking out the 
right expert for each stage of treatment, and making an agreed management 
plan, are all required.
For  any  situation  which  involves  the  communication  of  bad  news,  consider 
SPIKES:3
  • Setting up the interview.
  • Assess the patient’s Perception of the situation.
  • Obtain an Invitation (asking the patient’s permission to explain).
  • Give Knowledge and information to the patient.
  • Address the Emotional response with Empathy.
  • Strategy and Summary: aim for consensus with patient and family.

_OHCM_10e.indb   519

_OHCM_10e.indb   519

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
520

The genetics of cancer

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

How cancers develop
Human life requires cells which are capable of dividing millions of times. These 
cells need to be able to adapt and change so that diff erent tissues and organs 
can be formed. They need to command their own blood supply. Without extensive 
mechanisms to control cell growth and prevent the replication of abnormal cells, 
these requirements for life become the basis for the development of a cancer. 
Failure of control mechanisms causes cancer.

Cancer is a genetic disease. Genetic changes occur in pathways associated with 
cell growth, cell diff erentiation, and cell death. Mutations can be inherited or ac-
quired. Acquired or somatic errors occur due to age, exposure to carcinogens, and 
in unchecked rapid cell turnover. Mutations result in:
  • ‘gain of function’ oncogenes that have pathological activity in the absence of a 
relevant signal. For example, ras is a protein involved in signal transduction. It is 
mutated in ~30% of human cancers. Oncogenes behave in a dominant manner: 
mutation to one allele results in unchecked activation.

  • ‘loss of function’ tumour suppressor genes no longer act as inhibitors of pro-
malignant processes. In most cases, mutations to both alleles must occur for a 
cancer phenotype. This can occur either as two separate somatic events, or in 
the case of predisposition genes, the ﬁ rst ‘hit’ is inherited and the second oc-
curs somatically. Tumours therefore occur earlier and more frequently in familial 
cancers. p53 is a tumour suppressor gene mutated in ~50% of human cancers.
Most cancers arise from multiple mutations. This is perhaps best represented in 
the stepwise accumulation of mutations in colorectal cancer (ﬁ g 11.2). An under-
standing of the molecular biology of cancer facilitates drug development (ﬁ g 11.3).

Normal cell
APC gene
mutation

Hyperproliferation
K-ras
mutation

Adenoma

Carcinoma

DCC gene
mutation

p53
mutation

Others

Normal
cell

Hyper-
proliferation

Early
adenoma

Intermediate
adenoma 

Late
adenoma

Carcinoma

Metastasis

Fig 11.2  Cellular mutations and contributing genes in the development of colorectal cancer.

Fig 11.3  Therapeutic targeting in cancer.

Reprinted from Cell, 144(5), Hanahan et al., Hallmarks of Cancer: the Next Generation, 646–74, 2011, with 
permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   520

_OHCM_10e.indb   520

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Hereditary cancer syndromes
A hereditary cancer4 is suggested by:
  • unusual early age or presentation (eg male breast cancer)
  • multiple primary cancers or bilateral/multifocal cancers
  • clustering of cancers in relatives
  • cancers in multiple generations
  • rare tumours (eg retinoblastoma) or histology (medullary thyroid cancer, p223)
  • ethnicity (eg Ashkenazi heritage and breast cancer).
Genetic testing is appropriate if the sensitivity and speciﬁ city of the test are good 
enough, and if the result of the test will impact diagnosis and management (see p27).
Breast/ovarian cancer
~5–10%  of  breast  cancers  are  due  to  mutations  in  BRCA1  (17q)  or  BRCA2  (13q).4,5 
Both genes function as tumour suppressors although they are dominant: a cancer 
phenotype  can  be  seen  when  one  copy  of  the  gene  is  normal.  A  BRCA1  mutation 
confers a 55–65% lifetime risk of breast cancer and a 39% risk of ovarian cancer. 
For  BRCA2,  the  risk  of  breast  cancer  is  45%  (6%  in  aff ected  males),  and  11%  for 
ovarian  cancer.  Mutations  are  also  linked  to  prostate,  peritoneal,  and  pancreatic 
cancers.  TP53  mutations  (somatic  >inherited)  also  confer  a  risk  of  breast  cancer.
Refer if:
  • 1st-degree relative with: breast cancer <40yrs, male breast cancer, bilateral breast 

521

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

cancer <50yrs

  • 1st- and 2nd-degree relative with breast cancer or ovarian cancer
  • three 1st- or 2nd-degree relatives with breast cancer
  • risk assessment calculation of >3% risk in 10yrs or lifetime risk ≥17%
  • other: Ashkenazi ancestry, sarcoma <45yrs, multiple cancers at a young age.
Genetic counselling and testing for  BRCA1,  BRCA2, and  TP53 mutations is off ered if 
calculated risk of mutation is >10%. If known BRCA1/2 mutation, off er women annual 
MRI 30–49yrs and annual mammograpy 50–69yrs (MRI 20–69yrs if TP53 mutation). Pro-
phylactic tamoxifen or raloxifene may be appropriate depending on tolerance and 
VTE/endometrial  cancer  risk.  Surgical  management  (mastectomy/oophorectomy) 
should only be via a specialist MDT.
Colorectal cancer
~25% have a family history. ~5% have identiﬁ ed mutations. Refer to specialist genet-
ic service if: two 1st-degree relatives with colorectal cancer at average age <60yrs, 
or if criteria for an autosomal dominant colorectal cancer syndrome is met:
  • Lynch  syndrome  (hereditary  non-polyposis  colorectal  cancer  (HNPCC)):  1–3% 
of colorectal cancer. Autosomal dominant due to mutations in mismatch repair 
genes. Lifetime risk of colorectal cancer up to ~80%. Increased risk of other ‘Lynch 
cancers’: endometrium, ovary, urinary tract, stomach, small bowel, hepatobiliary 
tract. Suspect if ≥3 aff ected relatives (one 1st-degree), from two successive gen-
erations, of whom one was aff ected <50yrs old. Colonoscopic surveillance (at least 
biennial) from 25–75yrs.

  • Familial adenomatous polyposis: Due to mutations in the APC tumour suppressor 
gene (5q) (ﬁ g 11.2). <1% of colorectal cancer. Causes multiple colorectal adenomas 
(>100  in  classical  disease)  which  undergo  malignant  transformation.  Gene  pen-
etrance approaches 100% by 50yrs. Surveillance sigmoidoscopy from 12yrs, with 
prophylactic surgery usually <25yrs guided by polyp number, size, and dysplasia.
  • Peutz–Jeghers  syndrome:  1  in  25 000–280 000.  Hamartomatous  polpys.  10–20% 
risk of colorectal cancer, ~50–60% risk of GI cancer, ~60% risk of breast cancer. 
Due to germline mutations in STK11, a tumour suppressor gene (19p14). Surveillance 
in all (see p708).
Prostate cancer
5–10% (~50% disease <55yrs) estimated to be due to inherited factors. Genes include 
BRCA1, BRCA2, mismatch repair, and HOXB13 which interacts with androgen receptor. 
Age and race contribute. See p530 for screening.
Other familial cancer syndromes Von Hippel–Lindau (p320, p712), Carney complex 
(p223), MEN (p223), neuroﬁ bromatosis (p514).

_OHCM_10e.indb   521

_OHCM_10e.indb   521

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
522

Cancer diagnosis

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

A variety of clinical signs and symptoms should alert you to the possible presence of 
malignancy. The following list is based on clinical features with a 3% positive predic-
tive value for cancer.6 It is by no means exhaustive and does not negate the value of 
clinical judgement. Urgent = within 2 weeks.
Lung
  • Admit if: symptomatic superior vena caval obstruction (p528), stridor.
  • Urgent referral if: >40yrs with unexplained haemoptysis, CXR suggestive of cancer.
  • Urgent CXR if >40yrs and:

  • persistent/recurrent chest infection
  • ﬁ nger clubbing
  • supraclavicular/cervical lymphadenopathy
  • thrombocytosis
  • two of: cough, fatigue, SOB, chest pain, weight loss, appetite, smoker, asbestos.

Upper GI
  • Urgent endoscopy if: dysphagia, or >55yrs with weight loss and upper abdominal 

pain/reﬂ ux/dyspepsia.

  • Urgent referral if: >40yrs plus jaundice, or upper abdominal mass.
  • Urgent CT of the pancreas if >60yrs plus weight loss plus any of: diarrhoea, back 

pain, abdominal pain, nausea, constipation, new-onset diabetes.

  • Non-urgent endoscopy if:

  • >55yrs and one of: treatment-resistant dyspepsia, upper abdominal pain plus 

low Hb, plts, or N&V plus upper GI symptoms/weight loss

  • haematemesis.

Lower GI
PR examination and FBC in all.
  • Urgent referral if: positive faecal occult blood, >40yrs with abdominal pain plus 
weight loss, >50yrs with unexplained rectal bleeding, >60yrs with iron-deﬁ cient 
anaemia or change in bowel habit.

  • Consider  urgent  referral  if:  rectal/abdominal  mass,  anal  ulceration,  <50yrs  with 
rectal bleeding plus lower GI symptoms or weight loss or iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia.
  • Faecal occult blood testing if: >50yrs plus abdominal pain or weight loss, <60yrs 

with change in bowel habit or iron-deﬁ ciency anaemia, >60yrs and anaemia.

Gynaecological
  • Urgent referral if: ascites, pelvic mass (ﬁ broid excluded), >55yrs with post-meno-

pausal bleeding.

Breast
  • Urgent referral if: >30yrs with unexplained breast lump, >50yrs with symptoms or 

change to one nipple.

  • Consider urgent referral if: skin changes, >30yrs with axillary lump.
Urology
  • Urgent referral if:

  • irregular prostate on PR, abnormal age-speciﬁ c PSA (see p530)
  • >40yrs  with  unexplained  visible  haematuria,  >60yrs  with  unexplained  non-

visible haematuria plus dysuria or WCC

  • non-painful enlargement or change in shape/texture of testicle.

Central nervous system
  • Urgent MRI in progressive, sub-acute loss of central neurological function.
Unexplained weight loss, appetite, and DVT can be non-speciﬁ c signs of cancer. 
Assess for any additional risk factors, symptoms, signs, and refer accordingly.
See also haematology (p352); thyroid (p600); skin (p596).

_OHCM_10e.indb   522

_OHCM_10e.indb   522

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
523

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Cancer and the multidisciplinary team
The care of all patients diagnosed with cancer is formally reviewed by a multidis-
ciplinary team (MDT). The aim of the MDT is to coordinate high-quality diagnosis, 
treatment, and care. The MDT should make a recommendation on the best initial 
treatment for cancer. Note: an MDT can only ‘recommend’; the decision must be 
made in consultation with the patient. The MDT is made up of healthcare profes-
sionals with expertise in treating and supporting patients with cancer. Members 
should include, but are not limited to:
  • lead clinician and lead nurse specialist
  • radiologists (see BOX ‘Interventional oncology’, p527)
  • histopathologists
  • expert surgeons, eg upper GI, colorectal, breast, plastics
  • oncologists (medical and clinical)
  • palliative care physicians
  • nominated member to support ongoing clinical trials
  • patient representative
  • administrative support.

Cancer staging
Staging systems are used to describe the extent of a cancer. This is vital to deter-
mine the most appropriate treatment, to assess prognosis, and to identify relevant 
clinical trials. A cancer is always referred to by the stage given at diagnosis. The 
TNM system is most widely used and is based on the extent of tumour (T), spread to 
lymph nodes (N), and the presence of metastases (M) (table 11.1).
Table 11.1  TNM cancer staging

Tx

T0

Tis

Primary tumour cannot be measured Nx

Nodes cannot be assessed

Primary tumour cannot be found

N0

No node involvement

Carcinoma in situ (abnormal cells 
present)

N1–3

Number/location of node 
metastases

T1–4

Size and/or extent of primary tumour 
(1=small tumour /minimal invasion; 
4=large tumour/extensive invasion)

M0

M1

No distant spread

Distant metastases

Other preﬁ xes may also be used: c refers to clinical stage; p is the stage after 
pathological examination; y refers to stage after neoadjuvant therapy; r is used if 
a tumour is re-staged after a disease-free interval; a indicates stage at autopsy.

The TNM staging may be converted to an overall, less detailed classiﬁ cation of 
cancer stage: 0–IV. Stage 0 refers to carcinoma in situ; Stages I–III describe the 
size of cancer and/or nearby spread; Stage IV indicates metastatic disease.

Some cancers may have alternative staging systems such as Duke’s classiﬁ ca-
tion for colorectal cancer (p616). See also lung cancer (p176); breast cancer (p602); 
oesophageal cancer (p618); bladder cancer (p647).

Cancer imaging
Imaging is essential in oncology for diagnosis, prognosis, and to inform and guide 
treatment. As well as plain radiographs, ultrasound scans, CT, and MRI; there is a 
wealth of more specialist imaging including:
PET-CT: PET uses a non-speciﬁ c radioactive tracer (FDG) which highlights areas of 
increased metabolism, cell proliferation, or hypoxia. It therefore accumulates in 
cancer cells >non-cancer cells. PET-CT is a powerful combination of anatomical (CT) 
and functional (PET) information allowing diagnosis, increased accuracy of staging, 
and assessment of treatment response.
Monoclonal antibodies: Radio-labelled tumour antibodies speciﬁ c to the tumour 
under investigation, eg prostate speciﬁ c membrane antigen, somatostatin (neu-
roendocrine tumours), oestrogen receptor (breast). They can off er better speciﬁ c-
ity than standard PET images. (For monoclonal antibodies in treatment see p524.)
Bone scintigraphy (bone scan): Detects abnormal metabolic activity in bones 
including bone metastases.

_OHCM_10e.indb   523

_OHCM_10e.indb   523

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
524

Cancer treatment: medicine and surgery

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy7 is the use of any chemical substance to treat disease. In modern-
day use, the term refers primarily to the use of cytotoxic drugs in the treatment of 
cancer. The aim is to deliver enough cytotoxic drug to a cancer-cell target which 
is expressed diff erently compared to normal tissue. Cytotoxic drugs are given at 
intervals (cycles of treatment) to allow recovery of normal tissue. Chemotherapy is 
the only systemic treatment for cancer (surgery and radiotherapy are local treat-
ments). This is important as most cancers are considered to be systemic either due 
to metastases, or the potential to metastasize in the future. Chemotherapy should 
be prescribed and given only under expert guidance by people trained in its use.
Includes:
  • Single-agent: Rarely curative as genetically resistant cells are selected out.
  • Combination chemotherapy: A combination of drugs with diff erent mechanisms 
of action and diff erent side-eff ect proﬁ les reduces the likelihood of resistance and 
toxicity. The drugs used should have:

  • cytotoxic activity for that tumour, preferentially able to induce remission
  • diff erent mechanisms of action, ideally additive or synergistic eff ects
  • non-overlapping toxicity to maximize beneﬁ t of full therapeutic doses
  • diff erent mechanisms of resistance.

  • Adjuvant: After other initial treatment to reduce the risk of relapse, eg following 

surgical removal of, eg breast, bowel cancer.

  • Neoadjuvant: Used to shrink tumours prior to surgical or radiological treatment. 

May allow later treatment to be more conservative.

  • Palliative: No curative aim, off ers symptom relief, may prolong survival.
Classes of cytotoxic drugs
  • Alkylating agents: Anti-proliferative drugs that bind via alkyl groups to DNA lead-

ing to apoptotic cell death, eg cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, busulfan.

  • Angiogenesis inhibitors: Eg bevacizumab, aﬂ ibercept, sunitinib.
  • Antimetabolites: Interfere with cell metabolism including DNA and protein synthe-

sis, eg methotrexate, 5-ﬂ uorouracil.

  • Antioestrogens: Aromatoase inhibitors (eg letrozole, anastrozole), oestrogen 

receptor antagonists (eg tamoxifen, raloxifene) used in breast cancer treatment.
  • Antitumour antibiotics: Interrupt DNA function, eg dactinomycin, doxorubicin, 

mitomycin, bleomycin.

  • Monoclonal antibodies: Antibodies to a speciﬁ c tumour antigen can slow tumour 
growth by enhancing host immunity, or be conjugated with chemotherapy/radioac-
tive isotopes to allow targeted treatment. Expect more of these in future.

  • Topoisomerase inhibitors: Interrupt regulation of DNA winding, eg etoposide.
  • Vinca alkaloids and taxanes: ‘Spindle poisons’ which target mechanisms of cell 

division, eg vincristine, vinblastine, docetaxel.

Side-eff  ects
Due to cytotoxic eff ects on non-cancer cells. Greatest eff ect seen on dividing cells, ie 
gut, hair, bone marrow, gametes (see BOX ‘Fertility and cancer’, p525).
  • Vomiting: Prophylaxis given with most cytotoxic regimens (see p251).
  • Alopecia: May profoundly impact quality of life. Consider ‘cold-cap’, wig services.
  • Neutropenia: Most commonly seen 7–14d after chemotherapy. Neutropenic sep-
sis is life-threatening and needs urgent assessment and empirical treatment (p352).

Extravasation of chemotherapy
Extravasation8 = inadvertent inﬁ ltration of a drug into subcutaneous/subdermal 
tissue. Presentation: Tingling, burning, pain, redness, swelling, no ‘ﬂ ashback’/re-
sistance from cannula. Management: Stop and disconnect infusion. Aspirate any 
residual drug before cannula removed. Follow local policies (ask for the ‘extravasa-
tion kit’). Follow any drug-speciﬁ c recommendations. For DNA-binding drugs (an-
thracyclines, alkylating agents, antitumour antibiotics), use a dry cold compress to 
vasoconstrict and  drug spread. For non-DNA-binding drugs (vinca alkaloids, taxa-
nes, platin salts), use a dry warm compress to vasodilate and  drug distribution. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   524

_OHCM_10e.indb   524

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Surgery
  • Prevention: Risk-reducing surgery, eg thyroidectomy in MEN (p223), colectomy 

525

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

in FAP (p521).

• Screening: Endoscopy, colposcopy.
  • Diagnosis  and  staging:  Fine  needle  aspiration,  core  needle  biopsy,  vacuum-
assisted biopsy, excisional/incisional biopsy, sentinel lymph node biopsy, endos-
copy, diagnostic/staging laparoscopy, laparascopic ultrasound.

  • Treatment:  Resection  of  solid  tumour  (may  be  combined  with  chemo/radio-

therapy).

  • Reconstruction: Eg following treatment for breast, head and neck cancers.
  • Palliation: Bypass, stoma, stenting, pathological fractures.

Clinical trials
  • Advantages: Possibility of more eff ective treatment than currently available, 
close monitoring with direct access to a research team, reassurance from in-
creased number of clinical encounters, gain from altruism.

  • Disadvantages: Possibility of receiving therapy that is no better or worse than 
standard therapy, unknown toxicity from new agents, time-consuming, anxiety 
from increased number of clinical encounters.

You may look after patients who are participating in clinical trials. For many of 
these, you will not be familiar with the trial therapy or even know which therapy 
the patient is receiving: a new therapy, an old therapy, or placebo. Contact the 
research team to discuss any clinical concerns or change in treatment. Contact 
details should be recorded in the patient’s notes. Look in the notes for, or ask the 
patient if they have a copy of the ‘Participant Information Sheet’ which is manda-
tory for all UK research studies.

Information on relevant trials for your patient is available:

  • Cancer Research UK (www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/ﬁ nd-a-clinical-trial).
  • UK Clinical Trials Gateway (www.ukctg.nihr.ac.uk).

Fertility and cancer
Chemotherapy and radiotherapy may:
  • damage spermatogonia causing impaired spermatogenesis or male sterility
  • hasten oocyte depletion leading to premature ovarian failure.
If cancer treatment carries a risk of infertility, fertility preservation techniques9 
should be discussed prior to treatment being given.
  • Men: Semen cryopreservation should be off ered before treatment due to the risk 
of genetic damage in sperm after initiation of chemotherapy. Intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection means that even a small amount of banked sperm can be used 
successfully in the future.

  • Women: Cryopreservation of:

1      Embryos
2      Oocytes: if ethical objections to embryo preservation or no partner
3      Ovarian tissue: no ovarian stimulation required, experimental technique.
Ovarian transposition (oophoropexy) may be possible prior to pelvic radiothera-
py but protection is not guaranteed due to radiation scatter.

Beau’s lines

Beau’s  lines  (ﬁ g  11.4)  are  horizontal  depressions  in 
the  nail  plate  that  run  parallel  to  the  moon-shaped 
portion of the nail bed. They result from a sudden in-
terruption of nail keratin synthesis and may be due 
to  local  infection/trauma,  systemic  illness,  or  from 
medication  (p76). Each line in this photo coincided with 
a round of chemotherapy for breast cancer. 

Fig 11.4  Beau’s lines.

_OHCM_10e.indb   525

_OHCM_10e.indb   525

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
526

Cancer treatment: radiotherapy

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Radiotherapy10 is used in >50% of all cancer and forms part of treatment in 40% 
of those considered cured. It uses ionizing radiation to cause damage to DNA. This 
prevents cell division and leads to cell death. The aim of radiotherapy treatment is to 
inactivate cancer cells without causing a severe reaction in normal tissue.
Radical treatment Given with curative intent. Total dose ranges from 40–70 gray 
(Gy) in up to 40 fractions. Some regimens involve several smaller fractions a day 
with a gap of 6–8h. Combined chemoradiation is used in some sites, eg anus and 
oesophagus, to increase response rate.
Palliative  radiotherapy  Aims  to  relieve  symptoms,  may  not  impact  on  survival. 
Doses are smaller and given in fewer fractions to off er short-term tumour control 
with minimal side-eff ects. Palliation is used for brain metastases, spinal cord com-
pression, visceral compression, and bleeding, eg haemoptysis, haematuria. Bone pain 
from metastases can be reduced or eliminated in 60% of cases.
Early reactions
Occur ~2 weeks into treatment, peak ~2–4 weeks after treatment.
  • Tiredness: ~80%. Improves ~4 weeks after treatment completed but chronic in 

~30%. Advise patients to stay as active as possible.

  • Skin reactions: Include erythema, dry desquamation, moist desquamation, and 

ulceration. Aqueous cream can be used on unbroken areas.

  • Mucositis: All patients receiving head and neck treatment should have a dental 
check-up before therapy. Avoid smoking. Antiseptic mouthwashes may help. Aspi-
rin gargle and other soluble analgesics can be tried. Treat oral thrush with ﬂ ucona-
zole 50mg/24h PO, nystatin may exacerbate nausea.

  • Nausea and vomiting: Occur when stomach, liver, or brain treated. Try metoclo-
pramide 10mg/8h PO (dopamine antagonist), domperidone 10mg/8h PO (blocks the 
central chemoreceptor trigger zone), or ondansetron 4–8mg/8h  PO/IV (serotonin 
5HT3 antagonist) (see p251).

  • Diarrhoea: Usually after abdominal or pelvic treatments. Maintain good hydration. 
Avoid high-ﬁ bre agents. Try loperamide 2mg PO after loose stools (max 16mg/24h).
  • Dysphagia: Following thoracic treatments. Speech and language input, nutrition.
  • Cystitis: After pelvic treatments. Drink plenty of ﬂ uid.
Late reactions
Months-years after treatment.
  • CNS/PNS:  Somnolence:  4–6wks  after  brain  radiotherapy.  Consider  steroid  dose. 
Spinal cord myelopathy: progressive weakness. MRI to exclude cord comp ression. 
Brachial plexopathy: numb, weak, or painful arm after axillary radio therapy.

  • Lung: Pneumonitis can occur 6–12wks after thoracic treatment causing dry cough 

± dyspnoea. Bronchodilators and tapered steroids may help.

  • GI: Xerostomia = reduced saliva. Dental care and nutrition important. Treat with 
water, saliva substitutes, salivary stimulants. Benign strictures of oesophagus or 
bowel. Treat with dilatation. Seek a specialist surgical opinion regarding ﬁ stulae. 
Radiation proctitis may be a problem after prostate irradiation.

  • GU:  Urinary  frequency:  small  ﬁ brosed  bladder  after  pelvic  treatment.  Vaginal 
stenosis, dyspareunia, erectile dysfunction can occur after pelvic radiotherapy. 
fertility: due to pelvic radiotherapy (see p525).

  • Endocrine:  Panhypopituitarism  following  radical  treatment  involving  pituitary 
fossa. Check hormone proﬁ le in children: growth hormone replacement may be 
required. Hypothyroidism in ~50% after neck treatment: check TFTs annually.

  • Secondary  cancers:  Risk  (2–4  per  10 000  person-years)  is  usually  insigniﬁ cant 
compared to recurrence/death from primary lesion. More important for younger 
patients after curative treatment. Women <35yrs receiving radiotherapy for Hodg-
kin’s lymphoma should be off ered breast screening from 8yrs after treatment.

 Cancer survival means  numbers living with poor health or disability after treat-
ment (~625 000 in UK). Remember the emotional and physical impact of cancer ex-
tends beyond the prescribed course of radiotherapy/chemotherapy. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   526

_OHCM_10e.indb   526

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Methods of delivering radiotherapy
Conventional  external  beam  radiotherapy  (EBRT):  Is  the  most  common  form  of 
treatment. Delivers beams of ionizing radiation to the patient from an external linear 
accelerator.
Stereotactic radiotherapy is a highly accurate form of EBRT used to target small 
lesions with great precision—most frequently in treating intracranial tumours. It is 
often referred to by the manufacturer’s name, eg Gamma Knife®, Truebeam®.
Brachytherapy involves a radiation source being placed within or close to a tumour, 
allowing a high local radiation dose. Implants may be placed within a cavity (eg 
uterus, post-surgical space) or within tissue (eg prostate, breast).
Radioisotope therapy uses tumour-seeking radionuclides to target speciﬁ c tissues. 
For example, 131I (radioiodine) to ablate remaining thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy 
for thyroid cancer.

Interventional oncology
Interventional oncology (IO) refers to interventional radiology procedures used in 
the treatment or palliation of patients with cancer. IO can be divided into disease-
modifying and symptomatic procedures.
Disease-modifying IO:
Intended to modify cancer progression and/or to improve prognosis. Includes:
  • Image-guided  ablation,  eg  radiofrequency  ablation,  cryoablation,  irreversible 

electroporation.

  • Embolization, eg transarterial embolization, chemoembolization, selective inter-

nal radiation therapy.

  • Image-guided brachytherapy.
  • Isolated perfusion chemotherapy: uses occlusion techniques to protect normal 

tissue from high doses of chemotherapy.

527

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Interventional treatment option
Temporary/permanent image-guided ascitic drain
Temporary/permanent image-guided pleural drain
Superior vena cava stenting

Symptomatic IO:
Provides relief from cancer-related symptoms, but does not modify the underlying 
disease process. The techniques (table 11.2) can off er signiﬁ cantly improved qual-
ity of life, reduce admissions, and increase time spent outside of hospital.
Table 11.2  Interventional techniques available for cancer symptom control
Clinical problem
Ascites
Pleural eff  usion
Superior vena cava obstruc-
tion (p528)
Oesophageal obstruction
Large bowel obstruction
Tumour-related haemorrhage Transarterial embolization
Jaundice
Renal tract obstruction
Bone metastases
Talk to your interventional radiologist.

Biliary drainage and stenting
Nephrostomy, ureteric stenting
Image-guided ablation

Oesophageal stenting
Colonic stenting

_OHCM_10e.indb   527

_OHCM_10e.indb   527

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
528

Oncology emergencies

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Emergencies11,12 in oncology include:
Neutropenic sepsis
Temperature >38oC and neutrophil count <0.5≈109/L. Suspect in all patients who are 
unwell and within 6wks of receiving chemotherapy. Localizing signs may be absent. 
Examine  indwelling  catheter  sites.  Immediate  treatment  saves  lives.  Use  local 
guidelines or treat empirically with piperacillin/tazobactam (see p352).
Spinal cord compression
3–5% of cancer patients have spinal metastases. ~15% of those with advanced can-
cers develop metastatic spinal cord compression. Most commonly associated with 
lung, prostate, breast, myeloma, melanoma. Urgent treatment is required to pre-
serve neurological function and relieve pain.
Causes: Collapse or compression of a vertebral body due to metastases (common), 
direct extension of a tumour into vertebral column (rare).
Signs and symptoms: Back pain in ~95%. Ask about nocturnal pain and pain with 
straining.  Worry  if  there  is  cervical/thoracic  pain.  Also  limb  weakness,  diffi  culty 
walking, sensory loss, bowel/bladder dysfunction. Maintain a high index of suspicion.
Management: Admit for bed rest and arrange urgent (within 24h) MRI of the whole 
spine. Give dexamethasone 16mg/24h PO with prophylatic gastroprotection, eg PPI, 
and  blood  glucose  monitoring.  If  reduced  mobility  consider  thromboprophylaxis 
(compression stockings, LMWH). Refer urgently to clinical oncology/cancer MDT. Ra-
diotherapy is the commonest treatment and should be given within 24 hours of MRI 
diagnosis. Decompressive surgery ± radiotherapy may be appropriate depending on 
prognosis. Patients with loss of motor function after >48h are unlikely to recover 
function. (See also p466.)
Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome
Reduced venous return from head, neck, and upper limbs. Due to extrinsic compres-
sion (most common), or venous thrombosis (consider if current or past central ve-
nous access). SVC syndrome with airway compromise requires urgent treatment.
Causes:  >90% of  SVC syndrome results from malignancy. Most common cancers: 
lung (~75%), lymphoma, metastatic (eg breast), thymoma, germ cell.
Signs and symptoms: Diagnosis is made clinically. SOB, orthop noea, stridor, pleth-
ora/cyanosis, oedema of face and arm, cough, headache, engorged neck veins (non-
pulsatile JVP), engorged chest wall veins. Pemberton’s test:1 elevation of the arms 
to the side of the head causes facial plethora/cyanosis.
Management:  Prop  up.  Assess  for  hypoxia  (pulse  oximetry,  blood  gas)  and  give 
oxygen if needed. Dexamethasone 16mg/24h.  CT is used to deﬁ ne the anatomy of 
the obstruction. Balloon venoplasty and SVC stenting provide the most rapid relief 
of symptoms (see BOX ‘Interventional oncology’, p527). Treat with radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy depending on the sensitivity of the underlying cancer.
Malignancy-associated hypercalcaemia
Most common metabolic abnormality in cancer patients: ~10–20% of patients with 
cancer,  ~40%  of  myeloma.  It  is  a  poor  prognostic  sign:  75%  mortality  within  3 
months. Calcium is highly protein-bound and needs correcting to the serum albumin 
concentration. PTH levels should be suppressed (see pp676–7).
Causes: PTH-related protein produced by the tumour (see p529), local osteolysis, eg 
myeloma, tumour production of calcitriol.
Signs and symptoms: Weight loss, anorexia, nausea, polydipsia, polyuria, constipa-
tion, abdominal pain, dehydration, weakness, confusion, seizure, coma.
Management: Aggressive rehydration. Bisphosphonates (if eGFR ≥30), eg zoledronic 
acid IV, usually normalize calcium within 3 days and can be given as a repeated infu-
sion. Calcitonin produces a more rapid (2h) but short-term eff ect and tolerance can 
develop. Long-term treatment is by con trol of  the underlying malignancy.

1  Pemberton described this ‘useful’ sign of venous obstruction due to a goitre in 1946.

_OHCM_10e.indb   528

_OHCM_10e.indb   528

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Brain metastases
Aff ect up to ~40% of patients with cancer. Most commonly: lung, breast, colorectal, 
melanoma. Poor prognosis: median survival 1–2 months; better prognosis with single 
lesion, breast cancer (see also p830).
Signs and symptoms: Headache (~50%, often worse in the morning, when cough-
ing or bending), focal neurological signs (~30%), ataxia (~21%), ﬁ ts (~18%), nausea, 
vomiting, papilloedema.
Management: Urgent CT/MRI depending on underlying diagnosis, disease stage, and 
performance status. Dexamethasone 16mg/24h to reduce cerebral oedema. Stereo-
tactic radiotherapy (see p527). Discuss with neurosurgery, especially if large lesion 
or associated hydrocephalus.
Tumour lysis syndrome
Chemotherapy for rapidly  proliferating tumours (leukaemia, lymphoma, myeloma) 
leads to cell death and urate, K+, phosphate, calcium. Risk of arrhythmia and renal 
failure (see p314).
Management: Prevent with hydration and uricolytics, eg rasburicase, allopurinol. 

Paraneoplastic syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes13 (table 11.3) consist of symptoms attributable to a malig-
nancy mediated by hormones, cytokines, or the cross-reaction of tumour antibodies. 
They do not correlate with stage/prognosis and may pre-date other cancer symptoms.
Table 11.3  Examples of paraneoplastic syndromes
Paraneoplastic 
syndrome
Hypercalcaemia

Malignancies

Comment

See

p528

Parathyroid hormone-related 
protein secreted by tumour

529

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

SIADH

Cushing’s
syndrome

Neuropathy

Lambert–Eaton
myasthenic
syndrome

Dermatomyositis 
& polymyositis
Acanthosis
nigricans
Pemphigus

Hypertrophic
osteoarthropathy

Excessive antidiuretic hormone 
(ADH) secretion causing Na+
Tumour secretes ACTH or CRF, 
causing adrenal to produce high 
levels of corticosteroid
Antibody-mediated neuronal 
degeneration: peripheral, auto-
nomic, cerebellar
Antibody to voltage-gated 
ion channel on pre-synaptic 
membrane causes weakness 
(proximal leg most common) 
Inﬂ ammation of the muscles +/- 
heliotrope rash 
Velvety, hyperpigmented skin
(usually ﬂ exural)
Blisters  to  skin/mucous  mem-
branes
Periosteal bone formation, arthri-
tis, and ﬁ nger clubbing

Lung, oesophagus, 
skin, cervix, breast, 
kidney
Lung, pancreas, lym-
phomas, prostate
Lung, pancreas, 
thymus, carcinoid

p673

p224

Lung, breast, my-
eloma, Hodgkin’s, GI

p504

Mostly lung. Also GI, 
breast, thymus

p512

Lung, breast, 
ovary, GI

GI

p552

p562

Lymphoma, thymus, 
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Lung

Trousseau’s sign
Trousseau (ﬁ g 11.5) was probably the ﬁ rst to discover a 
paraneoplastic syndrome. He noticed that many patients 
with  migratory  thrombophlebitis  (‘Trousseau’s  sign’) 
developed  gastric  cancer.  Unfortunately,  he  developed 
migratory  thrombophlebitis  himself  and  correctly  pre-
dicted his own death from GI malignancy.

Fig 11.5  Armand Trousseau 1801–1867.

Wellcome Library, London. Armand Trousseau. Lithograph by JBA Lafosse, 1866, after P Petit.

_OHCM_10e.indb   529

_OHCM_10e.indb   529

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
530

Tumour markers

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Tumour markers14 are speciﬁ c molecules (usually glycoproteins) that may be found in 
higher concentrations in the serum, tissue, or urine in patients with certain cancers.
Tumour markers in diagnosis
Tumour markers are insufﬁ ciently sensitive or speciﬁ c to be diagnostic in isolation.
  • Many tumour markers are  in several cancers and benign conditions (table 11.4).
  • Measuring ≥1 tumour marker is unlikely to aid diagnosis unless suspecting a germ 

cell tumour.

  • Do not make opportunistic requests for panels of tumour markers in patients with 
non-speciﬁ c symptoms: they are not helpful and lead to potentially unnecessary 
investigation. This includes testing PSA in women and CA 125 in men.

  • In carefully selected patients, in whom cancer is suspected, highly raised levels of 

a tumour marker may be helpful:

  • -fetoprotein  (FP)  and  human  chorionic  gonadotrophin  (hCG)  in  testicular/

germ cell tumours.

  • CA 125 in combination with USS and menopausal status.
  • FPin those at high risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
  • PSA >100ng/mL usually indicates metastatic prostate cancer.

Tumour markers in monitoring
The main value of tumour markers is in monitoring patients known to have cancer. 
This includes the course of the disease, the eff ectiveness of treatment, and the detec-
tion of cancer recurrence. The following markers may be useful:
  • FP and hCG in testicular/germ cell tumours.
  • CEA in colorectal cancer.
  • CA 125 in ovarian cancer.
  • A cautious interpretation of PSA within the limits of its speciﬁ city and sensitivity.

Screening for cancer
The UK has several well-established cancer screening programmes. Women are 
invited for mammography every 3yrs (50–70yrs) and off ered cervical smear tests 
every 3–5yrs (25–64yrs). Men and women aged 60–74yrs are off ered faecal occult 
blood testing every 2yrs.

Screening tests aim to pick out those who need further investigation to rule 
out or diagnose a cancer, in the hope that earlier diagnosis and treatment result 
in better outcomes. All screening tests come with risk: anxiety, harm/discomfort 
from the test, cost, false positives resulting in further invasive tests, false nega-
tives conferring inappropriate reassurance when symptoms arise. When consider-
ing screening an asymptomatic population the potential risks and beneﬁ ts need to 
be weighed carefully and the Wilson criteria (see p23) should be satisﬁ ed.
Should PSA be used to screen for prostate cancer?
Most men with prostate cancer will have a high prostate-speciﬁ c antigen (PSA). The 
higher the PSA, the more likely cancer is. However, PSA is non-speciﬁ c and also raised 
in benign prostatic disease, BMI <25, recent ejaculation, recent rectal examination, 
prostatitis, and UTI. 76% of patients with a raised PSA do not have cancer. Following 
screening tests (see PROMIS study, 2017, for use of multi-parametric MRI), prostate 
biopsy is required for diagnosis. This has an inherent risk of complications includ-
ing bleeding, infection, and urinary retention.  ~1% will require hospital admission.

The risks of PSA testing and subsequent biopsy need to be counterbalanced by 
beneﬁ ts from screening.15 ~1 in 800 men avoid death from prostate cancer as a re-
sult of PSA screening. But screening picks up many cancers that will never become 
fatal. This ‘overdiagnosis’ is thought to occur in ~40% of positive screens with 
signiﬁ cant risks from treatment including urinary incontinence, erectile dysfunc-
tion, and IHD. This balance of risk versus beneﬁ t means that population screening 
for prostate cancer using PSA is not recommended. Despite this, any patient >50yrs 
(or >45yrs if high risk) can request PSA testing in primary care. Interpret any PSA 
result in conjunction with digital rectal examination and other risk factors.

_OHCM_10e.indb   530

_OHCM_10e.indb   530

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

5

5

3

3

1

1

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

8

8

Table 11.4  Summary of tumour markers

Tumour marker

Relevant cancer

Use

Other associated cancers

Associated benign conditions

Alpha-fetoprotein 
(FP)

Germ cell/testicular

Hepatocellular 

Calcitonin

Medullary thyroid

Cancer antigen 
(CA)125

Ovarian

Diagnosis, monitoring treat-
ment, detecting recurrence

Diagnosis, monitoring treat-
ment, detecting recurrence
Monitoring ovarian cancer. 
Prognosis after chemotherapy

Colorectal; gastric; hepatobiliary; lung 

Cirrhosis; pregnancy; neural tube defects

None known

C-cell hyperplasia

Breast; cervical; endometrial; hepatocellular; 
lung; non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; pancreatic; 
medullary thyroid carcinoma; peritoneal; 
uterine

Liver disease; cystic ﬁ brosis; pancreatitis; urinary reten-
tion; diabetes; heart failure; pregnancy; SLE; sarcoid; RA; 
diverticulitis; IBS; endometriosis; ﬁ broids 

CA19–9

CA15–3

Pancreatic

Monitoring pancreatic cancer Colorectal; gastric; hepatocellular; 

oesophageal; ovarian

Acute cholangitis; cholestasis; pancreatitis; diabetes; 
IBS; jaundice

Breast

Monitoring breast cancer

Hepatocellular; pancreatic

Cirrhosis; benign breast disease; in normal health

Carcinoembryonic 
antigen (CEA)

Colorectal

Monitoring adenocarcinomas Breast; gastric; lung; mesothelioma; 

oesophageal; pancreatic

Smoking; chronic liver disease; chronic kidney disease; 
diverticulitis; jaundice

Human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (hCG)
Paraproteins

Germ cell/testicular, 
gestational trophoblastic
Myeloma

Diagnosis, prognosis, monitor-
ing of germ cell tumours
Diagnosis, monitoring treat-
ment, detecting recurrence

Thyroglobulin

Thyroid 
(follicular/papillary)

Monitoring treatment,  
detecting recurrence

Lung

None known

None known

Source data from ‘Serum tumour markers: how to order and interpret them’, Sturgeon C M, Lai L C, Duff y M J, 2012, BMJ Publishing Ltd.

Pregnancy

None known

None known

Oncology and palliative care

5
3
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
532

Palliative care: principles and pain

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

You matter because you are you and you matter to the last moment of your life. 
We will do all we can to help you, not only to die peacefully, but to live until you die.

Dame Cicely Saunders (1918–2005), founder of the modern hospice.
Palliative care is the active, holistic care of patients with advanced progressive ill-
ness. It combines management of pain and other symptoms, with the provision of 
psychological, social, and spiritual support.
Palliative care is not just for the end of life and it is not just for patients with 
cancer.
Palliative care should run in parallel with other medical treatments. Good symptom 
control is important in any disease for improving quality of life and may even pro-
long survival.16 Take time to ﬁ nd out exactly what is troubling your patient using a 
problem-based approach. Consider:
  • physical
  • psychological
  • spiritual
  • social.
Remember, each person comes with a set of emotions, preconceptions, and a family 
already attached. Most hospitals now have a dedicated palliative care team for 
help and advice (including out of hours). Use their expertise.
Assessment of pain
Pain is one of the most feared sequelae of a terminal diagnosis and yet it is not 
inevitable. However, pain is a complex phenomenon. While the aim of management 
is for the patient to be pain free, this may not be achievable in all cases so do not 
promise this.

Do not assume a cause: detailed history and examination are needed to under-
stand aetiology, which will guide subsequent treatment, eg pain from nerve inﬁ l-
tration or local pressure may respond better to agents other than opioids. History 
and  examination  are  essential  for  all  patients,  including  those  at  the  end  of  life. 
Evaluate severity, nature, functional deﬁ cit, and psychological state as all of these 
contribute to the symptom burden.
Management of pain
Aim to modify the underlying pathology where possible, eg radiotherapy, chemo-
therapy, surgery. Use analgesia to relieve background pain and provide additional 
PRN doses for ‘breakthrough’ pain. Eff ective analgesia is possible in the majority of 
patients by combining ﬁ ve principles:

1      By the mouth—give orally whenever possible.
2      By the clock—give at ﬁ xed intervals to off er continuous relief.
3      By the ladder—following the WHO stepwise approach (see ﬁ g 13.5, p575).
4      For the individual—there are no standard doses for opioids, needs vary.
5      Attention to detail—communicate, set times carefully, warn of side-eff ects.

The WHO analgesic ladder 
Increase and decrease the analgesia required according to the ‘steps’ on the ladder17 
(ﬁ g 13.5, p575):

1      Non-opioid, eg paracetamol.
2      Opioid for mild to moderate pain, eg codeine.
3      Opioid for moderate to severe pain, eg morphine, diamorphine, oxycodone.

  • Persisting/increasing pain and side-eff ects inform the decision to step up and step 
down. Take one step at a time to achieve pain relief without toxicity (except in new, 
severe pain when step 2 may be omitted).

  • Paracetamol (PO/PR/IV) at step 1 may have an opiate-sparing eff ect, and should be 

continued at steps 2 and 3. Stop step 2 opioids if moving to step 3.

  • Use laxatives and anti-emetics with strong opioids.
  • Adjuvants which can be added at all steps include: NSAIDS, amitriptyline, pregaba-
lin, corticosteroids, nerve block, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), 
radiotherapy. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   532

_OHCM_10e.indb   532

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
533

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Opioids
The amount of opioid required to relieve pain varies and should be titrated on an 
individual basis. Oral morphine is 1st-line. If the oral route is unavailable, use mor-
phine or diamorphine SC (see table 11.5, and tables 11.6, 11.7, p536). Explanation and 
regular review are important. Prescribe anti-emetics and laxatives for all patients.
Start low, go slow: For an opioid-naïve patient with moderate to severe pain, con-
sider oral morphine 5mg every 4 hours plus 5mg PRN (maximum hourly). Consider 
a lower starting dose if elderly, BMI, or renal impairment. If pain is not controlled, 
 dose by 30–50% every 24h.
Convert to modiﬁ ed release: When pain is controlled, calculate the total daily 
dose including PRN and divide into two 12h doses of a modiﬁ ed-release preparation 
(eg MST Continus® 12h). Transdermal preparations are available: seek expert help 
for dose, check adhesion, and rotate site.
Use a PRN dose for breakthrough pain: 1/10th–1/6th of the total daily dose as an 
immediate-release preparation, eg Oramorph® or Sevredol®.
Side-effects: Drowsiness, nausea/vomiting (usually  after 5 days), constipation, 
dry mouth. If diffi  culty tolerating morphine, or pain plus toxicity, consider an opi-
oid switch (eg oxycodone) and  dose by 25–30%.
Toxicity: Sedation, respiratory depression, visual hallucinations, myoclonic jerks, 
delirium. Be alert: recognizing toxicity early usually means naloxone is avoided. 
Monitor pulse oximetry, give oxygen if required. Consider : intracranial bleed, 
renal failure.  Opioids and sedating drugs. Consider hydration. Seek expert help 
if remains opioid-toxic or in pain. Naloxone is only indicated for life-threatening 
respiratory depression (see p842). In patients on regular opiates it can precipitate 
a pain crisis and potentially fatal acute withdrawal.18
Renal failure: Patients with renal impairment (eGFR <30) are at risk of toxicity 
due to accumulation of renally excreted opioids and metabolites. Monitor closely. 
Fentanyl, alfentanil, and buprenorphine have predominantly hepatic metabolism 
—seek expert advice.
Concerns: Patients may shrink from using opioids. Misconceptions are common: 
they are addictive, for the dying, if they use morphine now it will not work when 
they really need it. Respiratory depression is very rare when opioids are correctly 
titrated but opioids often get blamed when a patient deteriorates. Reassure pa-
tients that opioids are effective and safe when used appropriately.
Morphine-resistant pain: Seek expert help. Consider methadone, ketamine, and 
adjuvants such as NSAIDS, steroids, muscle relaxants, anxiolytics, nerve blocks. If 
neuropathic pain is suspected, try amitriptyline, pregabalin, or topical lidocaine. 
Consider the eff ect of psychological and spiritual well-being on pain (see p535).
Rapid analgesia: Most PRN medication takes time to have an eff ect. If this is a 
problem,  seek  expert  help  regarding  rapid-release  preparations  (eg  sublingual, 
intranasal, or buccal fentanyl). Try to pre-empt times of high pain (eg dressing 
changes) and give analgesia in advance.
Table 11.5  Opioid dose equivalents: conversions are not exact, potency can vary. If in doubt, use 
a dose below your estimate. Practice is variable: always defer to local guidelines ﬁ rst.

Morphine PO
Morphine SC
Diamorphine SC
Oxycodone PO
Oxycodone SC
Alfentanil SC
Codeine PO
Tramadol PO
Fentanyl patch

Relative potency 4h dose (mg)
1
2
3
2
4
30
0.1
0.1
25mcg/h approximates to 60mg/24h oral morphine

5
2.5
1.5–2
2.5
1.25
Too short-acting
60 (6h dose)
100 (6h dose)

24h dose (mg)
30
15
10
15
7.5
1
240
400

_OHCM_10e.indb   533

_OHCM_10e.indb   533

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
534

Palliative care: other symptoms

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Non-pain symptoms19 include:
Nausea and vomiting
Causes: Chemotherapy, constipation, hypercalcaemia, oral candidiasis, GI obstruc-
tion, drugs, severe pain, infection, renal failure.
Management: Treat reversible causes, eg laxatives for constipation, analgesia for 
pain, hypercalcaemia (see p528), ﬂ uconazole for oral candidiasis. Anti-emetic choice 
should be based on the likely mechanism of nausea. Consider the site of anti-emetic 
action, especially when using a combination of drugs. Oral absorption may be poor 
so consider alternative routes (SC/IV/PR). Options include the following:
  • Cyclizine 50mg/8h: antihistamine, anticholinergic, central action so good for in-

tracranial disorders.

  • Metoclopramide 10–20mg/8h: blocks central chemoreceptor trigger zone, peripheral 
prokinetic eff ects so good in gastroparesis, monitor for extra-pyramidal side-eff ects.
  • Domperidone 10–20mg/8h PO: peripheral antidopaminergic so no dystonic eff ects.
  • Haloperidol  1.5mg  PO  initially  1–2  times  daily:  dopamine  antagonist,  eff ective  in 
drug- or metabolically induced nausea, use lower doses IV/SC as twice as potent.
  • Ondansetron 4–8mg/8h: serotonin antagonist, good for chemo/radiotherapy-relat-

ed nausea, may cause constipation.

  • Levomepromazine 6.25mg, initially 1–2 times daily: broad spectrum, but can sedate, 

may be very eff ective if fear/anxiety are contributing to symptoms.

Antisecretory drugs, such as hyoscine butylbromide or octreotide may be required 
for patients with vomiting and bowel obstruction: seek expert advice.
Constipation
Causes: Very common side-eff ect of opioids. Better to prevent than treat so pre-
scribe  laxatives  for  all  patients  starting  opioids.  Also  hypercalcaemia  (see  p528), 
dehydration, drugs, or intra-abdominal disease.
Treatment: Treat reversible causes. Good ﬂ uid intake. Ensure privacy and access to 
toilet. Medication options include the following:
  • Stimulant (eg senna 2–4 tablets or bisacodyl 5–10mg) at night ± a softener (eg 

sodium docusate 100mg BD).
  • Osmotic laxative (eg  macrogol).
  • Rectal treatments: bisacodyl/glycerol suppositories, phosphate enema.
Breathlessness
Causes: Look for reversible causes including infection, eff usion, anaemia, arrhyth-
mia, thromboembolism. If stridor or signs of superior vena cava syndrome, treat 
urgently (see p528).
Treatment: Treat reversible causes as appropriate. Consider thoracocentesis ± pleu-
rodesis for a pleural eff usion. Recurrent pleural eff usions may warrant a radiologi-
cally placed permanent drain (see p527). If the patient remains distressed, consider a 
trial of low-dose opioids. These reduce respiratory drive and the sensation of breath-
lessness. If opioid-naive, start with 2.5mg of an immediate-release morphine every 
4h. If already taking an opioid, use the appropriate breakthrough dose (see p533). 
Benzodiazepines may help if associated anxiety, eg lorazepam 500mcg SL every 4–6h.
Oral problems
Causes: Poor oral hygiene, radiation, drugs (anticholinergics, chemotherapy, diuret-
ics), infection (candidiasis, herpes simplex).
Treatment: Oral candidiasis: topical miconazole, oral ﬂ uconazole 50mg OD but check 
for interactions (eg warfarin). Nystatin is often ineff ective and may exacerbate nau-
sea.  Herpes  simplex:  oral  gan/aciclovir.  Good  mouth  care  maintains  comfort  and 
the ability to communicate. Maintain ﬂ uid intake with frequent, small drinks. Sim-
ple measures are often  eff ective: sugar-free chewing gum, normal saline mouth-
washes, soft toothbrush. Products containing alcohol may sting. Salivary stimulants 
(rather  than  substitutes)  can  be  helpful  for  dry  mouth,  eg  pilocarpine  eye  drops 
4%, 3 drops in the ﬂ oor of mouth QDS. Severe mucositis may need admission and 
systemic opioids. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   534

_OHCM_10e.indb   534

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Insomnia
Causes: Terminally ill patients may experience physical and emotional exhaustion. 
Often multifactorial. Poor sleep can increase symptom burden.
Treatment: Simple steps may make a big diff erence: appropriate room temperature, 
darkness, and quiet during the night (request a side room for in-patients). Give pre-
scribed glucocorticoids in the morning. Avoid waking patients for late medications 
and routine observations. Discuss and address psychosocial issues. In some cases 
zopiclone  or  benzodiazepines  may  be  used  to  help  patients  rest  and  re-establish 
normal sleep–wake cycles (may exacerbate delirium).
Pruritus
Causes:  Systemic disease (renal failure, hepatitis, polycythaemia), cancer-related 
(cholestasis, lymphoma, leukaemia, hepatoma, myeloma, paraneoplastic), primary-
skin disease, drug reaction (opioids, SSRI, chemotherapy).
Treatment: Underlying causes where possible: cholestasis (biliary stenting, colestyr-
amine, sertraline, rifampicin), opioid-induced (antihistamine, opioid switch), para-
neoplastic (paroxetine). Topical emollients regularly and as a soap substitute. Avoid 
topical antihistamines due to risk of contact dermatitis.
Venepuncture
Repeated venepuncture with the risk of painful extravasation and phlebitis may be 
avoided by use of a central catheter (eg Hickman® tunnelled line or PICC). Problems: 
infection, blockage (ﬂ ush with 0.9% saline or dilute heparin every week), axillary 
thrombosis, and line slippage.
Agitation See ‘Care in the last days of life’, p536.
Respiratory tract secretions See ‘Care in the last days of life’, p536.

535

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Spiritual pain

‘The  spiritual  aspects  of  an  illness  concerns  the  human  experiences  of 
sickness (or ‘dis-ease’) and the search for meaning within it.’

Peter W Speck
Spirituality is a means of experiencing life. It relates to the way in which people 
understand and live their lives. It is comprised of elements including meaning, 
purpose, and something greater than ‘self’. It is distinct from faith, which is a 
religious experience, that may or may not be part of spirituality. Spiritual pain20,21 
or suff ering is common when people are facing death. It can include feelings of 
hopelessness, guilt, isolation, meaninglessness, and confusion. Consider:
  • the past: painful memories, guilt
  • the present: isolation, anger
  • the future: fear, hopelessness.
Reminiscence helps address the past, provides context, and off ers recognition of 
the patient as an individual. Anger should be acknowledged. Fear of the imagined 
future may not change, but is potentially reduced through discussion. The nature 
of hope may need to be modiﬁ ed. If hope for a cure is inappropriate, it should not 
be the main or only hope. Realistic hopes include discharge from hospital, seeing 
family members happy, being remembered. Making a will, handing over respon-
sibilities, and dealing with unﬁ nished business facilitate control and may allow a 
sense of completion.
Remember the whole person: history, coping mechanisms, state of well-being. 
Elements such as these will alter how disease aff ects the patient and how the 
patient responds to disease.
Companionship is essential in spiritual support. At times a doctor needs to mod-
ify their role to simply accompany the dying patient. This is manageable within 
established professional boundaries and therapeutic. If you cannot do this, ﬁ nd 
someone who can: palliative care teams, Macmillan nurses, and chaplains (a listen-
ing ear for patients of all faiths and none) are all valuable resources.
Spiritual pain is exacerbated by physical symptoms. These must be addressed if 
spiritual support is to be eff ective. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   535

_OHCM_10e.indb   535

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
536

Palliative care: care in the last days of life

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a

i
l
l

a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Once it is recognized that a patient is entering the ﬁ nal days of their illness (see ‘Di-
agnosing dying’, p12), the focus of care should be the relief of distressing symptoms.22
An individualized care plan should be made and discussed with your patient, their 
family, and relevant medical staff .
Continue to treat reversible problems as appropriate (eg urinary retention). Stop 
observations and blood tests (unless you are going to act on them). Rationalize medi-
cations but keep any that provide ongoing symptom beneﬁ t.
Prescribe as required subcutaneous end of life drugs. Prescribe PRN SC medica-
tions before they are needed, in anticipation of symptoms (see table 11.6).
Start  a  syringe  driver  when  symptom  control  drugs  are  needed  regularly
(see table 11.7). Practice is variable, some drugs may be used outside of licensed 
indications. Always defer to local guidelines ﬁ rst. If pain relief is insuffi  cient, review 
regular dose and recalculate the PRN requirement (1/10th–1/6th of 24h dose).

Anticipatory end of life medication
Table 11.6  Typical anticipatory medications. 
Indication
Pain

Drug
Morphine

Subcutaneous dose
2.5mg SC or 5mg PO (maximum every 1h)
If established on opioids use 1/10th–1/6th 
of daily dose (see p533 and table 11.5)
2.5mg SC (maximum every 1h)
2.5mg SC (maximum every 1h)
6.25mg SC TDS

Haloperidol
Agitation + N&V
Agitation + anxiety Midazolam

N&V

Troublesome
respiratory
secretions

Levomepromazine

Glycopyrronium

200mcg SC every 4–8h

Syringe drivers
Syringe drivers (table 11.7) allow a continuous SC infusion of drugs, avoiding re-
peated cannulation and injection when the oral route is no longer feasible. Some 
medications should not be put in the same syringe—check interactions. Take into 
account regular doses when calculating requirements. If in doubt, seek expert 
help. Do not forget anticipatory prescribing in addition (table 11.6).
Table  11.7    Symptom  control  medication  by  SC  infusion.  Practice  is  variable,  defer  to  local 
guidelines ﬁ rst.

Indication Drug
Pain

Morphine

Anxiety, 
agitation, 
delirium

N&V

Midazolam

Levomepromazine
Haloperidol

Cyclizine
Haloperidol

Subcutaneous dose
If opioid naïve: 10–15mg/24h
If on opioids calculate daily opioid dose
(consider reducing by 25–30%) then convert
(table 11.5) to SC morphine over 24h
5–20mg/24h

25–75mg/24h
2–10mg/24h

150mg/24h
1–3mg/24h

Respiratory 
secretions

Seizures

Levomepromazine

6.25–12.5mg/24h (sedation at higher doses)

Hyoscine butylbromide 60–120mg/24h. Also used for bowel colic

600–1200mcg/24h
Glycopyrronium
Seizure prophylaxis: midazolam 20–30mg/24h (may sedate). Dexa-
methasone, midazolam and levetiracetam can be given by SC infusion. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   536

_OHCM_10e.indb   536

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
537

e
r
a
c
e
v
i
t
a
i
l
l
a
p
d
n
a
y
g
o
o
c
n
O

l

Manage agitation. Look for reversible causes (pain, dehydration, urinary retention). 
Use an antipsychotic agent (eg haloperidol) to manage agitated delirium (see tables 
11.6, 11.7). Try a benzodiazepine such as midazolam if there is a large element of anxi-
ety. Opioids should not be used to sedate a dying patient. Seek early advice from 
palliative care if agitation is escalating or a signiﬁ cant problem.
Manage excessive secretions. Noise is generated by turbulent air ﬂ ow and pooling 
of saliva in the hypopharynx. This may be more distressing for relatives and staff  
than the patient. There is little evidence that pharmacological agents are beneﬁ cial, 
though  they  are  commonly  used.  Repositioning  and  intermittent  suctioning  may 
help. If you think the patient is distressed, consider a trial of an antisecretory drug 
(glycopyrronium or hyoscine butylbromide: see tables 11.6, 11.7).
Hydration.  Many patients approaching the end of life are unable to eat/drink or 
have a very poor appetite for food/ﬂ uid. Helping to take sips and good mouth care 
may suffi  ce. Fluid via non-oral routes (NG, SC, IV) is given for symptomatic beneﬁ t; the 
eff ect on survival is unknown. Any potential beneﬁ t must be weighed against the 
risk of symptomatic ﬂ uid overload. Discuss this with patients and families, explain-
ing the pros and cons of hydration and the uncertainty of the eff ect of hydration on 
survival:23 relatives may assume the patient is dying faster because of dehydration or 
that they will be suff ering with thirst. Make decisions about giving ﬂ uids on a case-
by-case basis. Review a patient’s hydration status at least daily.
Plan for death. Ensure that a ‘Do not attempt resuscitation’ or ‘Allow natural death’, 
order has been made. Discuss this with the patient (where appropriate), their family, 
and/or others of importance to them. Document everything clearly. Do they want 
to die at home? This can usually be arranged at very short notice with help from 
district nursing teams and community palliative care. Discuss transfer to a hospice 
or nursing home if appropriate.
Respond to changes in the clinical situation. Patients who are thought to be at 
the end of their life occasionally improve. Be alert to signs of improvement, and be 
prepared to switch back to active treatment when appropriate.
Communicate.23 The importance of clear and regular written and verbal commu-
nication with dying patients and their families cannot be overemphasized. Find 
out what is important to your patient. How much information do they know and 
want to know about their situation and prognosis? Be sensitive to social, religious, 
and cultural issues.

On wanting to die
Physician-assisted suicide is the provision of drugs by a doctor for self-adminis-
tration by a person to terminate their own life. This is distinct from euthanasia 
where a doctor administers the lethal drug. There have been repeated attempts 
to introduce physician-assisted dying (physician-assisted suicide only of the ter-
minally ill) into UK law, but all have been rejected by Parliament.

Consider  autonomy.  Should  competent  patients  have  the  right  to  determine 
their  death,  especially  if  their  situation  is  unbearable,  without  prospect  of  im-
provement? It is a powerful argument. But bearable is subjective and prognosis is 
an inexact science. And beneﬁ cence is divided: is it merciful, or is it abandonment, 
to end suff ering through death? And what of consent? Consent is key. Yet consent 
is complex. Could a legal process help? Not without a unique understanding of 
each patient and the means by which they experience life. A combination of law 
and medicine may off er false comfort without full accountability by either. Protec-
tion for the vulnerable is a valid concern for doctors and society.

Requests to hasten death are complex and include personal, psychological, spir-
itual, social, cultural, and demographic factors. ~10% of terminally ill patients will 
consider euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide. These wishes may or may not 
be ﬁ xed, with ~50% of patients changing their mind within 6 months. Discuss this. 
Ask your patient how they feel today and what they are afraid of feeling tomor-
row. Listen. Answer questions. Off er palliative care. Palliative care is never futile. 
A wish to die is associated with a need for information, reassurance, and compe-
tence in symptom control. Provide these, or ﬁ nd someone who can.

_OHCM_10e.indb   537

_OHCM_10e.indb   537

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
12  Rheumatology

Contents
The rheumatological history  539
Assessing the locomotor system  540
Rheumatological investigations  541
Back pain  542
Osteoarthritis (OA)  544
Septic arthritis  544
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)  546

Crystal arthropathies:
Gout  548
CPPD arthropathy  548

Spondyloarthritides:
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS)  550
Enteropathic, psoriatic and
reactive arthritis  550

Autoimmune connective tissue diseases:
Systemic sclerosis  552
Mixed connective tissue disease  552
Relapsing polychondritis  552
Polymyositis & dermatomyositis  552
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)  554

Vasculitides:
Giant cell arteritis  556
Polyarteritis nodosa  556
Microscopic polyangiitis  556
Polymyalgia rheumatica  557
Fibromyalgia  558

Systemic disease with:
Ocular manifestations  560
Dermatological manifestations  562

Rheumatological emergencies:
 Acute SLE  554
 Acute systemic vasculitis  314 & 556
 Acute cord compression 466 & 543
 GCA  556
 Methotrexate-induced 

pneumonitis  547

 Neutropenic sepsis  352
 Scleroderma: pulmonary hypertensive 

or renal crisis  315 & 552

 Septic arthritis  544

Fig 12.1 When William Pitt the Elder, British 
statesman, was struck by yet another attack 
of  gout  he  was  absent  from  Parliament  in 
1773  when  its  members  were  persuaded  to 
levy a substantial tax on tea imports to the 
American colonies. The resulting Tea Act of 
1773  was  born.  Colonists  boarded  ships  of 
the East India Company in Boston Harbour 
and crates of tea were thrown overboard. In 
response, the British government sent troops 
to occupy Boston to control the colonists. The 
armed  response  to  these  occupying  forces 
led  to  the  American  War  of  Independence. 
Thirteen  colonies  from  the  United  Kingdom 
became  independent.  And  so  it  is  told  that 
gout had a part to play in the beginning of the 
American Revolution!

A rapidly advancing speciality
Rheumatology  originates  from  the  Greek  word  ‘rheuma’  meaning  that  which 
‘ﬂ ows as a river or stream’. The British Society of Rheumatology deﬁ nes rheuma-
tology as a ‘multidisciplinary branch of medicine that deals with the investigation, 
diagnosis and management of patients with arthritis and other musculoskeletal 
conditions...incorporating over 200 disorders aff ecting joints, bones, muscles and 
soft tissues, including inﬂ ammatory arthritis and other systemic autoimmune dis-
orders, vasculitis, soft tissue conditions, spinal pain and metabolic bone disease’. 
Rheumatological diseases aff ect over 10 million UK adults and 12 000 children. Re-
cent advances owe largely to new discoveries about the immunology of these 
disorders and the discovery of biologic DMARDS.

We thank Professor Kevin Davies, our Specialist Reader, for his contribution to this chapter. We also 
thank Dr Susie Higgins for her contribution to this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   538

_OHCM_10e.indb   538

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

539

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

The rheumatological history

In the assessment of an arthritic presentation, pay particular attention to the dis-
tribution of joint involvement (including spine) and the presence of symmetry. Also 
look for disruption of joint anatomy, limitation of movement (by pain or contracture), 
joint eff usions and peri-articular involvement (see p540 for a fuller assessment). Ask 
about, and examine for, extra-articular features: skin and nail (see p76) involvement 
(include scalp, hairline, umbilicus, genitalia, and natal cleft—psoriasis can easily be 
missed); eye signs (see p560); lungs (eg ﬁ brosis) (see p198); kidneys (see p314); heart; 
GI (eg mouth ulcers, diarrhoea); GU (eg urethritis, genital ulcers); and CNS.
Three screening questions for musculoskeletal disease

1      Are you free of any pain or stiff ness in your joints, muscles, or back?
2      Can you dress yourself without too much diffi  culty?
3      Can you manage walking up and down stairs?

If yes to all three, serious inﬂ ammatory muscle/joint disease is unlikely.

Presenting symptoms:
  • Pattern of involved joints.
  • Symmetry (or not).
  • Morning stiff ness >30min (eg RA).
  • Pain,  swelling, 

loss  of  function, 

 erythema, warmth.

Extra-articular features:
  • Rashes, photosensitivity (eg SLE).
  • Raynaud’s  (SLE;  systemic  sclerosis; 
polymyositis and dermatomyositis).

  • Dry eyes or mouth (Sjögren’s).
  • Red eyes, iritis (eg AS).
  • Diarrhoea/urethritis (reactive arthri-

tis).

  • Nodules or nodes (eg RA; TB; gout).
  • Mouth/genital  ulcers  (eg  Behçet’s, 

SLE).

  • Weight loss (eg malignancy, any sys-

temic inﬂ ammatory disease).

Related diseases:
  • Crohn’s/UC  (in  ank yl osing  spondylitis), 

preceding infections, psoriasis.

Current and past drugs:
  • NSAIDS, DMARDS (p547).
  • Biological agents (eg TNF inhibitors).
Family history:
  • Arthritis, psoriasis, autoimmune disease.
Social history:
  • Age.
  • Occupation.
  • Sexual history.
  • Ethnicity (eg SLE is commoner in African-

Caribbeans and Asians).

  • Ability to function (eg dressing, groom-

ing, writing, walking).

  • Domestic situation, social support, home 

adaptations.

  • Smoking (may worsen RA).
  • IBD.

Arthritides
The pattern of joint involvement can provide clues to the underlying cause (table 12.1).
Table 12.1  Patterns of presentation of arthritis
Monoarthritis Oligoarthritis (≤5 joints)
Septic arthritis Crystal arthritis
Crystal arthritis 
(gout, CPPD)
Osteoarthritis

Polyarthritis (>5 joints involved)
Asymmetrical
Symmetrical
Reactive 
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
arthritis
Psoriatic 
Osteoarthritis
arthritis

Psoriatic arthritis

Reactive arthritis, eg Yersinia, 
Salmonella, Campylobacter
Ankylosing spondylitis

Trauma 
(haemarthrosis)

Viruses (eg 
hepatitis A, B, & C; 
mumps)
Systemic conditions* (can be either)

Osteoarthritis

*Connective tissue disease (eg SLE and relapsing polychondritis), sarcoidosis, malignancy (eg leukaemia), 
endocarditis, haemochromatosis, sickle-cell anaemia, familial Mediterranean fever, Behçet’s.
Exclude septic arthritis in any acutely inﬂ amed joint, as it can destroy a joint 
in under 24h (p544). Inﬂ ammation may be less overt if immunocompromised (eg 
from the many immunosuppressive drugs used in rheumatological conditions) or 
if there is underlying joint disease. Joint aspiration (p541) is the key investigation, 
and if you are unable to do it, ﬁ nd someone who can.

_OHCM_10e.indb   539

_OHCM_10e.indb   539

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

540

Assessing the locomotor system

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

This aims to screen for rheumatological conditions primarily aff ecting mobility (as a 
consequence of underlying joint disease). It is based on the GALS locomotor screen 
(Gait, Arms, Legs, Spine). 1
Essence ‘Look, feel, and move’ (active and passive). If a joint looks normal to you, 
feels normal to the patient, and has full range of movement, it usu ally is normal. 
Make sure the patient is comfortable, and obtain their consent before examination. 
The GALS screening examination should be done in light underwear.
Spine: Observe from behind: is muscle bulk normal (buttocks, shoulders)? Is the 
spine  straight?  Are  paraspinal  muscles  symmetrical?  Any  swellings/deformities? 
Observe  from  the  side:  is  cervical  and  lumbar  lordosis  normal?  Any  kyphosis?  
‘Touch your toes, please’: is lumbar spine ﬂ exion normal, eg Schober’s test?1 Observe 
from in front: ‘Tilt your head’ (without moving the shoulders)—tests lateral neck 
ﬂ exion. Palpate for typical ﬁ bromyalgia tender points (see p558).
Arms: ‘Try putting your hands behind your head’—tests functional shoulder move-
ment. ‘Arms  out  straight’—tests elbow extension and forearm supination/prona-
tion. Examine the hands: any deformity (ﬁ g 12.2), wasting, or swellings? Squeeze 
across 2nd–5th metacarpophalangeal joints. Pain may denote joint or tendon syno-
vitis. ‘Put your index ﬁ nger on your thumb’—tests pincer grip. Assess dexterity, eg 
fastening a button or picking up a coin.
Legs: Observe legs: normal quadriceps bulk? Any swelling or deformity? With pa-
tient lying supine: any leg length discrepancy? Internally/externally rotate each hip 
in ﬂ exion. Passively ﬂ ex knee and hip to the full extent. Is movement limited? Any 
crepitus? Find any knee effusion using the patella tap test. If there is ﬂ uid, consider 
aspirating and testing for crystals or infection. With patient standing: observe feet: 
any deformity? Are arches high or ﬂ at? Any callosities? These may indicate an ab-
normal gait of some chronicity. Squeeze across metatarsophalangeal joints: see as 
for arms. Also: although not in the GALS system, palpate the heel and Achilles tendon 
to identify plantar fasciitis and Achilles tendonitis often associated with seronega-
tive rheumatological conditions. Examine the patient’s shoes for signs of uneven wear.
Gait: Observe walking: is the gait smooth? Good arm swing? Stride length OK? Nor-
mal heel strike and toe off ? Can they turn quickly?
Range of joint movement Is noted in degrees, with anatomical position being the 
neutral position—eg elbow ﬂ exion 0°–150° normally, but with ﬁ xed ﬂ exion and lim-
ited movement, range may be reduced to 30°–90°. A valgus deformity deviates later-
ally (away from the mid-line, ﬁ g 12.3); a varus deformity points towards the mid-line.

Fig 12.2 Swan-neck deformity.

Reproduced from Watts et al., Oxford Textbook of 
Rheumatology, 2013, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 12.3 Bilateral hallux valgus.
Reproduced from British Medical Journal, ‘Hallux valgus’, 
R Choa, R Sharp, K R Mahtani, 2010, with permission from 
BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

1  Schober’s test: make a mark on the lumbar spine at the level of the posterior iliac spine. Measure out 
a line from 5cm below to 10cm above the mark. Ask to bend forward as far as they can. If the line does 
not lengthen by at least 5cm in ﬂ exion, there is reduced lumbar ﬂ exion, eg in ankylosing spondylitis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   540

_OHCM_10e.indb   540

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

541

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Normal
Osteoarthritis
Haemorrhagic*

Acutely inﬂ amed

 • RA
 • Crystal

Some important rheumatological investigations
Joint  aspiration: The most important investigation in any monoarthritic pres-
entation (table 12.2, see also OHCS p706). Send synovial ﬂ uid for urgent white cell 
count, Gram stain, polarized light microscopy (for crystals, p548), and culture. The 
risk of inducing septic arthritis, using sterile precautions, is <1:10 000. 2 Look for 
blood,3 pus, and crystals (gout or  CPPD crystal arthropathy; p548). Do not at-
tempt joint aspiration through inﬂ amed and potentially infected skin (eg through 
a psoriatic plaque or overlying cellulitis).
Table 12.2  Synovial ﬂ uid in health and disease

Appearance
Clear, colourless
Clear, straw
Bloody, 
xanthochromic

Viscosity WBC/mm3
200
1000
10 000



Varies

Neutrophils

None
50%
50%

Turbid, yellow
Turbid, yellow
Turbid, yellow





1000–50 000
5000–50 000
10 000–100 000

Varies
~80%
>90%

Septic
*Eg trauma, tumour, or haemophilia.
Blood tests: FBC, ESR, urate, U&E, CRP. Blood culture for septic arthritis. Consider 
rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, ANA, other auto antibodies (p553), and HLA B27 (p551) 
—as guided by presentation. Consider causes of reactive arthritis (p551), eg viral 
serology, urine chlamydia PCR, hepatitis and HIV serology if risk factors are present.
Radiology: Look for erosions, calciﬁ cation, widening or loss of joint space, chang-
es in underlying bone of aff ected joints (eg periarticular osteopenia, sclerotic ar-
eas, osteophytes). Characteristic X-ray features for various arthritides are shown 
in ﬁ gs 12.4–12.6. Irregularity of the sacroiliac joints is seen in spondyloarthritis. 
Ultrasound and MRI are more sensitive in identifying eff usions, synovitis, enthesitis 
and infection than plain radiographs—discuss further investigations with a radi-
ologist. Do a CXR for RA, vasculitis, TB, and sarcoid.

Fig  12.5  X-ray  features  of 
rheumatoid arthritis (MCPJ).

Courtesy of Dr DC Howlett.

Loss of joint space
Osteophytes
Subarticular sclerosis
Subchondral cysts

Fig  12.4  X-ray  features  of 
osteoarthritis.

Courtesy of Dr DC Howlett.

Fig  12.6  X-ray  features  of 
gout (1st MTPJ).

Courtesy of Dr DC Howlett.

_OHCM_10e.indb   541

_OHCM_10e.indb   541

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

542

Back pain

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Back pain is very common, and often self-limiting, but be alert to sinister causes, ie 
malignancy, infection, or inﬂ ammatory causes.
Red ﬂ ags for sinister causes of back pain

Aged <20yrs or >55yrs old
Acute onset in elderly people
Constant or progressive pain
Nocturnal pain
Worse pain on being supine
Fever, night sweats, weight loss
History of malignancy
Abdominal mass

Thoracic back pain
Morning stiff ness
Bilateral or alternating leg pain
Neurological disturbance (incl. sciatica)
Sphincter disturbance
Current or recent infection
Immunosuppression, eg steroids/HIV
Leg claudication or exercise-related leg 
weakness/numbness (spinal stenosis).

Examination
1      With the patient standing, gauge the extent and smoothness of lumbar forward/

lateral ﬂ exion and extension (see p540).

2      Test for sacroiliitis: palpate posteriorly down the length of the spine, including 
over spinous processes, paraspinal muscles, and the sacroiliac joints; examining 
for tenderness.

3      Neurological deﬁ cits (see BOX): test lower limb sensation, power, and deep tendon 
and plantar reﬂ exes. Digital rectal examination for perianal tone and sensation.
4      Examine for nerve root pain (table 12.3): this is distributed in relevant dermato-
mes, and is worsened by coughing or bending forward. Straight leg test (L4, L5, 
S1): positive if raising the leg with the knee extended causes pain below the knee, 
which increases on foot dorsiﬂ exion (Lasègue’s sign). It suggests irritation to the 
sciatic nerve. The main cause is lumbar disc prolapse. Also femoral stretch test 
(L2–L4): pain in front of thigh on lifting the hip into extension with the patient lying 
face downwards and the knee ﬂ exed.

5      Signs of generalized disease—eg malignancy. Examine other systems (eg abdo-

men) as pain may be referred.

Causes Age determines the most likely causes:
15–30yrs:  Prolapsed  disc,  trauma,  fractures,  ankylosing  spondylitis  (AS;  p550), 
spondylolisthesis (a forward shift of one vertebra over another, which is 
congenital or due to trauma), pregnancy.

30–50yrs:  Degenerative  spinal  disease,  prolapsed  disc,  malignancy  (primary  or 
secondary from lung, breast, prostate, thyroid, or kidney ca).
Degenerative, osteoporotic vertebral collapse, Paget’s (see p685), malig-
nancy, myeloma (see p368), spinal stenosis.

>50yrs: 

Rarer: Cauda equina tumours, psoas abscess, spinal infection (eg discitis, usually staphy-
lococcal but also Proteus, E. coli, S. typhi, and TB—there are often no systemic signs).
Investigations Arrange relevant tests if you suspect a speciﬁ c cause, or if red 
ﬂ ag symptoms: FBC, ESR, and CRP (myeloma, infection, tumour), U&E, ALP (Paget’s), 
serum/urine  electrophoresis  (myeloma),  PSA.  X-rays—imaging  may  not  always 
be necessary but can exclude bony abnormalities and fractures. Correlation be-
tween  radiographic  abnormalities  and  clinical  features  can  be  poor.  MRI  is  the 
image of choice and can detect disc prolapse, cord compression (ﬁ g 12.7), can-
cer, infection, or inﬂ ammation (eg sacroiliitis).
Management Urgent neurosurgical referral if any neurological deﬁ cit (see BOX). 
Keep the diagnosis under review. For non-speciﬁ c back pain, focus on education 
and  self-management.  Advise  patients  to  continue  normal  activites  and  be  ac-
tive. Regular paracetamol ± NSAIDS ± codeine. Consider low-dose amitriptyline/du-
loxetine if these fail (not SSRIS for pain). Off er physiotherapy, acupuncture, or an 
exercise  programme  if  not  improving.4  Address  psychosocial  issues,  which  may 
predispose  to  developing  chronic  pain  and  disability  (see  p559).  Referral  to  pain 
clinic or surgical options for patients with intractable symptoms. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   542

_OHCM_10e.indb   542

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Neurosurgical emergencies
Acute cauda equina compression Alternating or bilateral root pain in legs, sad-
dle anaesthesia (perianal), loss of anal tone on PR, bladder ± bowel incontinence.
Acute cord compression Bilateral pain, LMN signs (p446) at level of compression, 
UMN and sensory loss below, sphincter disturbance.
Immediate urgent treatment prevents irreversible loss, eg laminectomy for disc 
protrusions, radiotherapy for tumours, decompression for abscesses.
Causes (same for both): bony metastasis (look for missing pedicle on X-ray), large 
disc protrusion, myeloma, cord or paraspinal tumour, TB (p392), abscess.

Table 12.3  Nerve root lesions

Nerve root
L2
L3
L4

L5

S1

Reﬂ ex aff  ected
Nil

Weakness

Pain
Across upper thigh Hip ﬂ exion and adduction
Across lower thigh Hip adduction, knee extension Knee jerk
Knee jerk
Across knee to 
medial malleolus
Lateral shin to 
dorsum of foot and 
great toe

Knee extension, foot inversion 
and dorsiﬂ exion
Hip extension and abduction 
Knee ﬂ exion
Foot and great toe dorsi-
ﬂ exion
Knee ﬂ exion
Foot and toe plantar ﬂ exion
Foot eversion

Posterior calf to 
lateral foot and 
little toe

Ankle jerk

Great toe jerk

543

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Fig  12.7  Sagittal  T2-weighted  MRI  of  the  lumbar 
spine showing a herniated L5–S1 disc.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   543

_OHCM_10e.indb   543

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

544

Osteoarthritis (OA)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Osteoarthritis is the most common joint condition worldwide, with a clinically signif-
icant impact on >10% of persons aged >60 years.5 It is usually primary (generalized), 
but may be secondary to joint disease or other conditions (eg haemochromatosis, 
obesity, occupational).
Signs and symptoms Localized disease (often knee or hip): Pain and crepitus on 
movement, with background ache at rest. Worse with prolonged activity. Joints may 
‘gel’ (brief stiff ness after rest, usually 10–15 minutes or so). Joints may feel unstable, 
with a perceived lack of power due to pain. Generalized disease: ‘Nodal OA’ (typi-
cally DIP, PIP, CMC joints, and knees in post-menopausal females). There may be joint 
tenderness, derangement and bony swelling (Heberden’s at DIP and Bouchard’s at 
PIP), reduced range of movement and mild synovitis. Assess eff ect of symptoms on 
occupation, family duties, hobbies, and lifestyle expectations.
Tests Plain radiographs show: Loss of joint space, Osteophytes, Subarticular sclerosis 
and Subchondral cysts (ﬁ g 12.4 p541). CRP may be slightly elevated.6
Management  Core  treatments:  Exercise  to  improve  local  muscle  strength  and 
general aerobic ﬁ tness (irrespective of age, severity, or comorbidity). Weight loss 
if overweight.7 Analgesia: Regular paracetamol ± topical NSAIDS. If ineff ective use 
codeine or short-term oral  NSAID (+PPI)—see  BOX. Topical capsaicin (derived from 
chillies) may help. Intra-articular steroid injections temporarily relieve pain in severe 
sym ptoms.  Intra-articular  hyaluronic  acid  injections  (viscosupplementation)  are 
not NICE approved8 Glucosamine and chondroitin products are not recommended, 
although patients may try them if they wish (can be bought over the counter). Non-
pharmacological: Use a multidisciplinary approach, including physiotherapists and 
occupational  therapists.  Try  heat  or  cold  packs  at  the  site  of  pain,  walking  aids, 
stretching/manipulation or TENS. Surgery: Joint replacement (hips, or knees) is the 
best way to deal with severe OA that has a substantial impact on quality of life.

Septic arthritis

Consider septic arthritis in any acutely inﬂ amed joint, as it can destroy a joint in 
under 24h and has a mortaility rate up to 11%. Inﬂ ammation may be less overt if im-
munocompromised (eg from medication) or if there is underlying joint disease. The 
knee is aff ected in >50% cases.
Risk factors Pre-existing joint disease (especially rheumatoid arthritis); diabetes 
mellitus, immunosuppression, chronic renal failure, recent joint surgery, prosthetic 
joints (where infection is particularly diffi  cult to treat), IV drug abuse, age >80yrs.9 
Investigations Urgent joint aspiration for synovial ﬂ uid microscopy and culture is 
the key investigation (p541), as plain radiographs and CRP may be normal. The main 
diff erential diagnoses are the crystal arthropathies (p548). Blood cultures are es-
sential (prior to antibiotics).
Ask  yourself  ‘How  did  the  organism  get  there?’  Is  there  immuno suppression,  or 
another focus of infection, eg from indwelling IV lines, infected skin, or pneumonia 
(present in up to 50% of those with pneumococcal arthritis)?10
Treatment If in doubt start empirical IV antibiotics (after aspiration) until sensi-
tivities are known. Common causative organisms are Staph. aureus, streptococci, 
Neisseria gonococcus, and Gram Ωve bacilli. Follow local guidelines for antibiotic 
choice  and  contact  microbiology  for  advice  for  all  complex  cases/immunosup-
pressed patients (eg HIV). Consider ﬂ ucloxacillin 2g QDS IV (clindamycin if penicillin 
allergic); Vancomycin IV plus 2nd- or 3rd-generation cephalosporin, eg cefuroxime if 
MRSA risk; 2nd- or 3rd-generation cephalosporin if Gram Ωve organisms suspected.11 
For suspected gonococcus or meningococcus, consider ceftriaxone. Antibiotics are 
required for a prolonged period, conventionally ~2 weeks IV, then if patient improv-
ing 2–4 weeks PO.12 Consider orthopaedic review for arthrocentesis, washout, and 
debridement; always urgently refer patients with prosthetic joint involvement.

_OHCM_10e.indb   544

_OHCM_10e.indb   544

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

545

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Prescribing NSAIDS: beneﬁ t vs risk proﬁ ling 
Around 60% of patients will respond to any NSAID, but there is considerable vari-
ation in response and tolerance—if one isn’t eff ective, try another. Mainly act as 
analgesics rather than modifying the disease process per se.
NSAIDs caused ~2000 UK deaths in 2011.13 Individualized risk: beneﬁ t analysis for 
each patient (including indication, dose, proposed duration of use, and comorbid-
ity) is crucial and needs careful and experienced thought. Follow local recommen-
dations and national guidelines where available.
NSAID side effects: The main serious side eff ects are GI bleeding (and ulcers and 
perforation), cardiovascular events (MI and stroke), and renal injury. The risks are 
dose related, starting with the ﬁ rst dose, so always aim to use the lowest possible 
dose for the shortest period of time. Risks increase considerably with age, polyp-
harmacy, history of peptic ulcers, and renal impairment.
GI side effects: NICE recommends co-prescription of PPI for any patient aged >45 
years,  and  those  with  other  risk  factors  for  GI  bleeding.  Drug  interactions  can 
increase bleeding risks—avoid concomitant prescribing of anticoagulants, anti-
platelet agents, SSRI, spironolactone, steroids, and bisphosphonates. Coxibs are 
slightly lower risk than non-selective NSAIDs.
Cardiovascular  side  effects: NSAIDS—all are associated with a small increased 
risk of  MI and stroke (independent of cardiovascular risk factor or duration of 
use).14 Risks are higher in those with concomitant IHD risk factors, eg diabetes and 
hypertension.  Coxibs  and  diclofenac  are  higher  risk,  and  are  contraindicated  if 
prior history of MI, PVD, stroke, or heart failure. Naproxen has the lowest cardiovas-
cular risk. Low-dose celecoxib may be considered for patients on low-dose aspirin 
(if NSAID is required) as it does not interact with it.15
Renal risks: Higher for patients already on diuretics, ACE, or ARB. Risks are also 
increased  in  the  elderly,  those  with  hypertension  and  T2DM.  Overall,  naproxen 
(<1000mg/day) or ibuprofen (<1200mg/day) plus PPI may be the safest options.
Alternatives to NSAIDs: Paracetamol, topical NSAIDs, opioids. Strengthening exer-
cises may be more beneﬁ cial than mild oral analgesics.
Counselling patients: Make sure patients understand about the drugs they are 
taking: bleeding is more common in those who know less about their drugs.16
  • Only to take NSAIDs when they need them.
  • Stop NSAIDs and seek urgent medical review if they develop abdominal pain or 

any symptoms of GI bleeding (eg report black stools ± faints immediately).

  • Do  not  mix  prescription  NSAIDs  with  over-the-counter  formulations:  mixing 

NSAIDS can increase risks 20-fold.

  • Smoking and alcohol increase risk proﬁ le of NSAIDs.

_OHCM_10e.indb   545

_OHCM_10e.indb   545

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

546

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

RA is a chronic systemic inﬂ ammatory disease, characterized by a symmetrical, de-
forming, peripheral polyarthritis. It increases the risk of cardiovascular disease by 
2–3 fold. Epidemiology Prevalence is ~1% ( in smokers). : >2:1. Peak onset: 5th–
6th decade. HLA DR4/DR1 linked (associated with severity).
Presentation Typically: Symmetrical swollen, painful, and stiff  small joints of hands 
and feet, worse in the morning. This can ﬂ uctuate and larger joints may become in-
volved. Less common presentations: •Sudden onset, widespread arthritis. •Recur-
ring mono/polyarthritis of various joints (palindromic RA).2 •Persistent monoarthritis 
(knee, shoulder, or hip). •Systemic illness with extra-articular symptoms, eg fa tigue, 
fever, weight loss, pericarditis, and pleurisy, but initially few joint problems (com-
moner in ). •Polymyalgic onset—vague limb girdle aches. •Recurrent soft tissue 
problems (eg frozen shoulder, carpal tunnel syndrome, de Quervain’s tenosynovitis).
Signs Early: (Inﬂ ammation, no joint damage.) Swollen MCP, PIP, wrist, or MTP joints 
(often symmetrical). Look for tenosynovitis or bursitis. Later: (Joint damage, de-
formity.) Ulnar deviation and subluxation of the wrist and ﬁ ngers. Boutonnière and 
swan-neck deformities of ﬁ ngers (ﬁ g 12.2 on p540) or Z-deformity of thumbs occur. 
Hand extensor tendons may rupture. Foot changes are similar. Larger joints can be 
involved. Atlanto-axial joint subluxation may threaten the spinal cord (rare).
Extra-articular  manifestations  Aff ect  ~40%  of  RA  patients.  Nodules:
Elbows,  lungs,  cardiac,  CNS,  lymphadenopathy,  vasculitis.  Lungs:  Pleural  dis-
ease,  interstitial  ﬁ brosis,  bronchiolitis  obliterans,  organizing  pneumonia.  Car-
diac:  IHD,  pericarditis,  pericardial  eff usion;  carpal  tunnel  syndrome;  peripheral 
neuropathy; splenomegaly (seen in 5%; only 1% have Felty’s syndrome: RA + sple-
nomegaly  +  neutropenia,  see  p698).  Eye:  Episcleritis,  scleritis,  scleromalacia, 
keratoconjunctivitis  sicca  (p560);  osteoporosis;  amyloidosis  is  rare  (p370).17,18
Investigations  Rheumatoid  factor  (RhF)  is positive  in  ~70%  (p553).  High  titres 
associated  with  severe  disease,  erosions,  and  extra-articular  disease.  Anticyclic 
citrullinated  peptide  antibodies  (anti-CCP)  are  highly  speciﬁ c  (~98%)  for  RA with 
a  reasonable  sensitivity  (70–80%);  they  may  also  predict  disease  progression.19 
Anaemia  of  chronic  disease,  platelets,  ESR, CRP. X-rays  show  soft  tissue  swell-
ing, juxta-articular osteopenia and joint space. Later there may be bony erosions, 
subluxation, or complete carpal destruction (see ﬁ g 12.5 on p541). Ultrasound and 
MRI can identify synovitis more accurately, and have greater sensitivity in detecting 
bone erosions than conventional X-rays.20
Diagnostic criteria See table 12.4.
Management Refer early to a rheumatologist (before irreversible destruction).
  • Disease activity is measured using the DAS28.3 Treatment should be escalated until 

satisfactory control is achieved: ‘treat to target’.

  • Early use of DMARDS and biological agents improves long-term outcomes (see BOX 

‘Inﬂ uencing biological events in RA’).

  • Steroids rapidly reduce symptoms and inﬂ ammation. Avoid starting unless appro-
priately experienced. Useful for acute exacerbations, eg IM depot methylpredniso-
lone 80–120mg. Intra-articular steroids have a rapid but short-term eff ect (OHCS 
pp706–9). Oral steroids (eg prednisolone 7.5mg/d) may control diffi  cult symptoms, 
but side eff ects preclude routine long-term use.

  • NSAIDS (see p545) are good for symptom relief, but have no eff ect on disease pro-

gression. Paracetamol and weak opiates are rarely eff ective.

  • Off er specialist physio- and occupational therapy, eg for aids and splints.
  • Surgery may relieve pain, improve function, and prevent deformity.
  • There  is  risk  of  cardiovascular  and  cerebrovascular  disease,  as  atherosclerosis 
is accelerated in RA.21 Manage risk factors (p93). Smoking also  symptoms of RA.

2  In rheumatological palindromes, arthritis lasting hours or days runs to and fro, visiting and revisiting 
three or more sites, typically knees, wrists, and MCP joints. It may presage RA, SLE, Whipple’s, or Behçet’s 
disease. Remissions are (initially) complete, leaving no radiological mark.
3  28-joint  Disease  Activity  Score—assesses  tenderness  and  swelling  at  28  joints  (MCPS,  PIPS,  wrists, 
elbows, shoulders, knees), ESR/CRP, and patient’s self-reported symptom severity.

_OHCM_10e.indb   546

_OHCM_10e.indb   546

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

547

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

B

2–10 large joints =1

Table 12.4  Criteria for diagnosing RA22
When to suspect RA? Those with ≥1 swollen joint and a suggestive clinical history, 
which is not better explained by another disease. Scores ≥6 are diagnostic.
Joint involvement (swelling or tenderness ± imaging evidence)
A
1 large joint =0
4–10 small* joints† =3
Serology (at least 1 test result needed)
Negative RF and negative anti-CCP =0
High +ve RF or high +ve anti-CCP =3
Acute phase reactants (at least 1 test result needed)
Normal CRP and normal ESR =0
Duration of symptoms: <6 weeks =0 ≥6 weeks =1

1–3 small* joints† =2
> 10 joints (at least 1 small joint) =5

D
*= MCPJ, PIPJ, 2nd–5th MTPJ, wrists, and thumb IPJ; †= with or without involvement of large joints.

Low +ve RF or low +ve anti-CCP =2

Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR =1

C

Quality of life
Depression, disability, and pain are important quality of life predictors. Be mindful 
of the impact of disease on relationships, work, and hobbies and acknowledge and 
explore this with your patients. Patients may wish to investigate complementary 
therapies and may ﬁ nd beneﬁ t from support groups .

Inﬂ uencing biological events in RA
The chief biological event is inﬂ ammation. Over-produced cytokines and cellular 
processes erode cartilage and bone, and produce the systemic eff ects seen in RA.
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDS) are 1st line and should ideally 
be started within 3 months of persistent symptoms. They can take 6–12 weeks for 
symptomatic beneﬁ t. Best results are often achieved with a combination of meth-
otrexate, sulfasalazine, and hydroxychloroquine.23 Leﬂ unomide is another option.
Immunosuppression is a potentially fatal SE of treatment (especially in combi-
nation  with  methotrexate)  which  can  result  in  pancytopenia,  susceptibility  to 
infection (including atypical organisms), and neutropenic sepsis (p352). Regular 
FBC, LFT monitoring.24
Other  SE  • Methotrexate—pneumonitis  (pre  treatment  CXR),  oral  ulcers,  hepa-
totoxicity,  teratogenic.  • Sulfasalazine—rash,  sperm  count,  oral  ulcers,  GI  upset. 
• Leﬂ unomide—teratogenicity ( and ), oral ulcers, BP, hepatotoxicity. • Hydroxy-
chloroquine—can cause retinopathy; pre treatment and annual eye screen required.
Biological agents and NICE guidance Initiated by specialists, for patients with 
active disease despite adequate trial of at least 2 DMARDS. Pre treatment screening 
for TB, hepatitis B/C, HIV essential.
1 TNF inhibitors: Eg inﬂ iximab (p265), etanercept, adalimumab, are approved by 
NICE as 1st-line agents. Where methotrexate is contraindicated, can be used as 
monotherapy. Clinical response can be striking, with improved function and health 
outcomes, although response may be inadequate/unsustained.25
2 B-cell depletion: Eg rituximab, used in combination with methotrexate and ap-
proved by NICE for severe active RA where DMARDS and a TNF blocker have failed.26
3 IL-1 and IL-6 inhibition: Eg tocilizumab (IL-6 receptor blocker), approved by NICE 
in combination with methotrexate where TNF blocker has failed (or is contraindi-
cated).27 Monitor for hypercholesterolaemia.
4 Inhibition of T-cell co-stimulation: Eg abatacept—licensed for active RA where 
patients have not responded to DMARDS or TNF blocker.28
Side eff  ects of biological agents Serious infection, reactivation of TB ( screen 
and consider prophylaxis) and hepatitis B; worsening heart failure; hypersensitiv-
ity; injection-site reactions and blood disorders. ANA and reversible SLE-type illness 
may evolve. Data suggests there is no increased risk of solid organ tumours but 
skin cancers may be more common.29 TNF inhibitors do not appear to be associated 
with a further increase in the already elevated lymphoma occurrence in RA.30

_OHCM_10e.indb   547

_OHCM_10e.indb   547

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

548

Crystal arthropathies: gout

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Gout31 typically presents with an acute monoarthropathy with severe joint inﬂ am-
mation (ﬁ g 12.8). >50% occur at the metatarsophalangeal joint of the big toe (ﬁ g 
12.12) (podagra). Other common joints are the ankle, foot, small joints of the hand, 
wrist, elbow, or knee. It can be polyarticular. It is caused by deposition of mono-
sodium urate crystals in and near joints. Attacks may be precipitated by trauma, 
surgery, starvation, infection, or diuretics. It is associated with raised plasma urate. 
In the long term, urate deposits (= tophi, eg in pinna, tendons, joints; see ﬁ g 12.9) and 
renal disease (stones, interstitial nephritis) may occur. Prevalence: ~1%.  :  ≈ 4 : 1.
Diff  erential  diagnoses  Exclude  septic  arthritis  in  any  acute  monoarthropathy 
(p544). Then consider reactive arthritis, haemarthrosis, CPPD (see following topic) and 
palindromic RA (p546).
Risk  factors  Reduced  urate  excretion:  Elderly,  men,  post-menopausal  females, 
impaired  renal  function,  hypertension,  metabolic  syndrome,  diuretics,  antihyper-
tensives, aspirin. Excess urate production: Dietary (alcohol, sweeteners, red meat, 
seafood),  genetic  disorders,  myelo-  and  lymphoproliferative  disorders,  psoriasis, 
tumour-lysis syndrome, drugs (eg alcohol, warfarin, cytotoxics). Associations: Car-
diovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and chronic renal failure (see 
p680).31 Gout is an independent risk factor for mortality from cardiovascular and 
renal disease. Screen for and treat CKD, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes.
Investigations  Polarized  light  microscopy  of  synovial  ﬂ uid  shows  negatively  bi-
refringent urate crystals (ﬁ g 12.10). Serum urate (SUA) is usually raised but may be 
normal.32 Radiographs show only soft-tissue swelling in the early stages. Later, well-
deﬁ ned ‘punched out’ erosions are seen in juxta-articular bone (see ﬁ g 12.6 on p541). 
There is no sclerotic reaction, and joint spaces are preserved until late.
Treatment of acute gout High-dose NSAID (see BOX, p545) or if CI use colchicine 
(500mcg BD) which is eff ective but slower to work (BNF states max 6mg per course 
although rheumatologists will often use more).33 NB: in renal impairment, NSAIDS and 
colchicine are problematic. Steroids (oral, IM, or intra-articular) may also be used.34 
Rest and elevate joint. Ice packs and ‘bed cages’ can be eff ective.
Prevention Lose weight, avoid prolonged fasts, alcohol excess, purine-rich meats, 
and low-dose aspirin. Prophylaxis: Start if >1 attack in 12 months, tophi, or renal 
stones. The aim is to  attacks and prevent damage caused by crystal deposition. Use 
allopurinol and titrate from 100mg/24h, increasing every 4 weeks until plasma urate 
<0.3mmol/L (max 300mg/8h). SE: rash, fever, WCC. Allopurinol may trigger an attack 
so wait 3 weeks after an acute episode, and cover with regular NSAID (for up to 6 
weeks) or colchicine (0.5mg/12h PO for up to 6 months). Avoid stopping allopurinol in 
acute attacks once established. Febuxostat (80mg/24h) is an alternative if allopuri-
nol is CI or not tolerated. It  uric acid by inhibiting xanthine oxidase (SE: LFTS) and 
is more eff ective at reducing serum urate than allopurinol (number of acute attacks 
the same).35 Uricosuric drugs  urate excretion.

Calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD)

  • Acute  CPPD crystal arthritis Acute monoarthropathy usually of larger joints in 

elderly. Usually spontaneous but can be provoked by illness, surgery, or trauma.
  • Chronic CPPD Inﬂ ammatory RA-like (symmetrical) polyarthritis and synovitis.
  • Osteoarthritis with CPPD chronic polyarticular osteoarthritis with superimposed 

acute CPP attacks. 

Risk factors Old age, hyperparathyroidism (see p222), haemochromatosis (see p288), 
hypophosphataemia (see p679).  Tests  Polarized  light  microscopy  of  synovial  ﬂ uid 
shows weakly positively birefringent crystals (ﬁ g 12.11). It is associated with soft tis-
sue calcium deposition on x-ray. Management Acute attacks: cool packs, rest, aspira-
tion, and intra-articular steroids. NSAIDS (+PPI) ± colchicine 0.5–1.0mg/24h (used with 
caution) may prevent acute attacks. Methotrexate and hydroxychloroquine may be 
considered for chronic CPP inﬂ ammatory arthritis.36

_OHCM_10e.indb   548

_OHCM_10e.indb   548

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

549

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Fig 12.8  Acute monoarthritis in gout.

Fig 12.9  Ulcerated tophi in gout.

Fig  12.10  Needle-shaped  monosodium  urate 
crystals  found  in  gout,  displaying  Negative 
 birefringence under polarized light.

Fig 12.11  Rhomboid-shaped calcium pyrophos-
phate dihydrate crystals in Pseudogout,  show ing 
Positive birefringence in polarized light.

Reproduced from Warrell et al., Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Image courtesy of Prof. Eliseo Pascual, 
Sección de Reumatología, 
Hospital General Universitario de Alicante.

Fig  12.12  Don’t  underestimate  the   severity  of  pain  caused  by  gout—as 
 illustrated by  satirical artist and gout  suff erer James Gillray (1756–1815).

© Lordprice collection / Alamy Stock Photo.

_OHCM_10e.indb   549

_OHCM_10e.indb   549

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

550

Spondyloarthritides

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

The spondyloarthropathies (SpA) are a group of related chronic inﬂ ammatory condi-
tions. They tend to, although not always, aff ect the axial skeleton with shared clinical 
features:

1      Seronegativity (= rheumatoid factor Ωve).
2      HLA B27 association—see BOX.
3      ‘Axial arthritis’: pathology in spine (spondylo-) and sacroiliac joints.
4      Asymmetrical large-joint oligoarthritis (ie <5 joints) or monoarthritis.
5      Enthesitis: inﬂ ammation of the site of insertion of tendon or ligament into bone, 

eg plantar fasc iitis, Achilles tendonitis, costochondritis.

6      Dactylitis:  inﬂ ammation  of  an  entire  digit  (‘sausage  digit’),  due  to  soft  tissue 

oedema, and tenosynovial and joint inﬂ ammation.

7      Extra-articular  manifestations:  eg  iritis  (anterior  uveitis),  psoriaform  rashes 
(psoriatic arthritis), oral ulcers, aortic valve incompetence, inﬂ ammatory bowel 
disease.

NB: BehÇet’s syndrome (p694) can also present with uveitis, skin lesions, and  arthritis 
and is not always associated with gross oral or genital ulcerations.

1      Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) A chronic inﬂ ammatory disease of the spine and 
sacroiliac joints, of unknown aetiology (likely strong genetic/environmental in-
terplay). Prevalence: 0.25–1%. Men present earlier: : ~6:1 at 16yrs old, and 
~2:1  at  30yrs  old.  ~90%  are  HLA  B27  +ve  (see  BOX). Symptoms  and  signs:  The 
typical patient is a man <30yrs old with gradual onset of low back pain, worse 
during the night with spinal morning stiff ness relieved by exercise. Pain radi-
ates from sacroiliac joints to hips/buttocks, and usually improves towards the 
end of the day. There is progressive loss of spinal movement (all directions)—
hence thoracic expansion. See pp540–2 for tests of spine ﬂ exion and sacroiliitis. 
The disease course is variable; a few progress to kyphosis, neck hyperextension 
(question-mark  posture;  ﬁ g  12.13),  and  spino-cranial  ankylosis.  Other  features 
include enthesitis (see BOX), especially Achilles tendonitis, plantar fasciitis, at the 
tibial and ischial tuberosities, and at the iliac crests. Anterior mechanical chest 
pain due to costochondritis and fatigue may feature. Acute iritis occurs in ~⅓ 
of patients and may lead to blindness if untreated (but may also have occurred 
many years before, so enquire directly). AS is also associated with osteoporosis 
(up to 60%), aortic valve incompetence (<3%), and pulmonary apical ﬁ brosis.
Tests: Diagnosis is clinical, supported by imaging.4 MRI allows detection of active 
inﬂ ammation (bone marrow oedema) as well as destructive changes such as 
erosions, sclerosis, and ankylosis. X-rays can show SI joint space narrowing or 
widening,  sclerosis,  erosions,  and  ankylosis/fusion.  Vertebral  syndesmophytes 
are  characteristic  (often  T11–L1  initially):  bony  proliferations  due  to  enthesitis 
between ligaments and vertebrae. These fuse with the vertebral body above, 
causing ankylosis. In later stages, calciﬁ cation of ligaments with ankylosis lead 
to a ‘bamboo spine’ appearance. Also: FBC (normocytic anaemia), ESR, CRP, HLA 
B27 +ve (+ve in 90–95% of cases but only 5% of patients HLA B27 +ve have AS). 
Management: Exercise, not rest, for backache, including intense exercise regi-
mens to maintain posture and mobility—ideally with a specialist physiotherapist. 
NSAIDS usually relieve symptoms within 48h, and may slow radiographic progres-
sion.37  TNF  BLOCKERS (eg etanercept, adalimumab) are indicated in severe ac-
tive AS.38 Local steroid injections provide temporary relief. Surgery includes hip 
replacement to improve pain and mobility if the hips are involved, and rarely spinal 
 osteotomy. There is risk of osteoporotic spinal fractures (consider bisphospho-
nates). Prognosis: There is not always a clear relationship between the activity 
of arthritis and severity of underlying inﬂ ammation (as for all the spondyloarth-
ritides). Prognosis is worse if ESR >30; onset <16yrs; early hip involvement or poor 
response to NSAIDS.39

2      Enteric  arthropathy  Associations:  Inﬂ ammatory  bowel  disease,  GI  bypass, 
coeliac and Whipple’s disease (p716). Arthropathy often improves with the treat-
ment of bowel symptoms (beware NSAIDS). Use DMARDS for resistant cases.

4  Sacroiliitis on imaging plus ≥1 SpA feature or HLA B27 positive plus ≥2 SpA features.

_OHCM_10e.indb   550

_OHCM_10e.indb   550

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

3      Psoriatic arthritis (OHCS p594.) Occurs in 10–40% with psoriasis and can present 
before skin changes. Patterns are: •symmetrical polyarthritis (like RA) •DIP joints 
•asymmetrical oligoarthritis •spinal (similar to AS) •psoriatic arthritis mutilans 
(rare, ~3%, severe deformity). Radiology: Erosive changes, with ‘pencil-in-cup’ 
deformity in severe cases. Associated with nail changes in 80%, synovitis (dac-
tylitis), acneiform rashes and palmo-plantar pustulosis. Management:  NSAIDS, 
sulfasalazine, methotrexate. Anti-TNF agents are also eff ective.

4      Reactive arthritis A condition in which arthritis and other clinical manifesta-
tions occur as an autoimmune response to infection elsewhere in the body—
typically  GI  or  GU,  although  the  preceding  infection  may  have  resolved  or  be 
asymptomatic by the time the arthritis presents. Other clinical features: Iritis, 
keratoderma blenorrhagica (brown, raised plaques on soles and palms), circinate 
balanitis (painless penile ulceration secondary to Chlamydia), mouth ulcers, and 
enthesitis. Patients may present with a triad of urethritis, arthritis, and conjunc-
tivitis (Reiter's syndrome). Tests: ESR & CRP. Culture stool if diarrhoea. Infec-
tious serology. Sexual health review. X-ray may show enthesitis with periosteal 
reaction. Management: There is no speciﬁ c cure. Splint aff ected joints acutely; 
treat with  NSAIDS or local steroid injections. Consider sulfasalazine or metho-
trexate if symptoms >6 months. Treating the original infection may make little 
diff erence to the arthritis.

551

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

HLA-B27 disease associations
The HLA system plays a key role in immunity and self-recognition. More than one 
hundred HLA B27 disease associations have been made40, yet the actual role of HLA 
B27 in triggering an inﬂ ammatory response is not fully understood. ~5% of the 
UK population are HLA B27 positive—most do not have any disease. The chance of 
an HLA B27 positive person developing spondyloarthritis or eye disease is 1 in 4. 
 Common associations include:
Ankylosing spondylitis: 85-95% of all those with AS are HLA B27 positive.
Acute anterior uveitis: 50–60% are HLA B27 positive.
Reactive arthritis: 60–85% are HLA B27 positive.
Enteric arthropathy: 50–60% are HLA B27 positive.
Psoriatic arthritis: 60–70% are HLA B27 positive.

Fig 12.13  Progression of disease and eff ect on posture in severe ankylosing spondylitis.

Reproduced from American Journal of Medicine 1976:60;279–85 with permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   551

_OHCM_10e.indb   551

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

552

Autoimmune connective tissue diseases

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Included under this heading are SLE (p554), systemic sclerosis, Sjögren’s syndrome 
(p710), idiopathic inﬂ ammatory myopathies (myositis—see following topic), mixed 
connective tissue disease, relapsing polychondritis, and undiff erentiated connective 
tissue disease and overlap syndromes. They overlap with each other, aff ect many 
organ systems, and often require immunosuppressive therapies (p376). Consider as a 
diff erential in unwell patients with multi-organ involvement, especially if no infection.
Systemic  sclerosis  Features  scleroderma  (skin  ﬁ brosis),  internal  organ  ﬁ brosis, 
and microvascular abnormalities. Severe cases have a 40–50% mortality at 5 years. 
90% are ANA positive and 30–40% have anticentromere antibodies (see BOX). Skin dis-
ease is limited or diff use. Limited involves the face, hands, and feet (formally CREST 
syndrome). It is associated with anticentromere antibodies in 70–80%. Pulmonary 
hypertension is often present subclinically, and can become rapidly life-threatening, 
so should be looked for (: sildenaﬁ l, bosentan). Diffuse can involve the whole body. 
Antitopoisomerase-1  (SCL-70)  antibodies  in  40%  and  anti-RNA  polymerase  in  20%. 
Prognosis is often poor. Control BP meticulously. Perform annual echocardiogram 
and spirometry. Both limited and diff use have the potential for organ ﬁ brosis: lung, 
cardiac, GI, and renal (p314) but this occurs later in limited sub-set.
Management:  Currently  no  cure.  Immunosuppressive  regimens,  including  IV 
cyclophos phamide, are used for organ involvement or progressive skin disease. Trials 
of antiﬁ brotic tyrosine kinase inhibitors are ongoing.41 Monitor BP and renal function. 
Regular ACE-i or A2RBS  risk of renal crisis (p314). Raynaud’s phenomenon: (see p708).
Mixed connective tissue disease Combines features of systemic sclerosis, SLE, and 
polymyositis and the presence of high titres of anti-U1-RNP antibodies.
Relapsing polychondritis Rare condition with recurrent episodes of cartilage inﬂ am-
mation  and  destruction.  Aff ects  pinna  (ﬂ oppy  ears),  nasal  septum,  larynx  (stridor), 
tracheobronchial tree (infections), and joints. Associations: Aortic valve disease, poly-
arthritis, and vasculitis. 30% have underlying rheumatic or autoimmune disease. Di-
agnosis is clinical. : Steroids, DMARDS or CPAP/tracheostomy for airway involvement.

Polymyositis and dermatomyositis

Rare conditions characterized by insidious onset of progressive symmetrical proxi-
mal  muscle  weakness  and  autoimmune-mediated  striated  muscle  inﬂ ammation 
(myositis), associated with myalgia ± arthralgia. Muscle weakness may also cause 
dysphagia, dysphonia (ie poor phonation, not dysphasia), or respiratory weakness. 
The myositis (esp. in dermatomyositis) may be a paraneoplastic phenomenon, com-
monly from lung, pancreatic, ovarian, or bowel malignancy. Screen for cancers.
Dermatomyositis  Myositis  plus  skin  signs:  •Macular  rash  (shawl  sign  is  +ve  if 
over  back  and  shoulders).  •Lilac-purple  (heliotrope)  rash  on  eyelids  often  with 
oedema (ﬁ g 12.26, p563). •Nailfold erythema (dilated  capillary  loops).  •Gottron’s 
papules: roughened red papules over the knuckles, also seen on elbows and knees 
(pathognomonic if CK + muscle weakness). Malignancy in 30% cases.
Extra-muscular signs In both conditions include fever, arthralgia, Raynaud’s, in-
terstitial lung ﬁ brosis and myocardial involvement (myocarditis, arrhythmias).
Tests  Muscle  enzymes  (ALT,  AST,  LDH,  CK,  & aldolase)    in  plasma;  EMG shows  char-
acteristic  ﬁ brillation  potentials;  muscle  biopsy  conﬁ rms  diagnosis  (and  excludes 
mimicking conditions). MRI shows muscle oedema in acute myositis. Autoantibody 
associations: (see BOX) anti-Mi2, anti-Jo1—associated with acute onset and intersti-
tial lung ﬁ brosis that should be treated aggressively.
Diff  erential  diagnoses  Carcinomatous  myopathy,  inclusion-body  myositis,  mus-
cular  dystrophy,  PMR,  endocrine/metabolic  myopathy  (eg  steroids),  rhabdomyoly-
sis, infection (eg HIV), drugs (penicillamine, colchicine, statins, or chloroquine).
Management  Start  prednisolone.  Immunosuppressives  (p376)  and  cytotoxics  are 
used early in resistant  cases. Hydroxychloroquine/topical tacrolimus for skin disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   552

_OHCM_10e.indb   552

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

553

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Plasma autoantibodies (Abs): disease associations
Always interpret in the context of clinical ﬁ ndings: Diff erent antibodies have 
diff erent disease asssociations.
Rheumatological: Rheumatoid factor (RhF) positive in:

Sjögren’s syndrome
Felty’s syndrome
RA
Infection (SBE/IE; hepatitis)

≤100% Mixed connective tissue disease
≤100% SLE

70% Systemic sclerosis
≤50% Normal

Anticyclic citrullinated peptide Ab (anti-CCP): 5 rheumatoid arthritis (~96% speciﬁ city)
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive by immunoﬂ uorescence in:

SLE
Autoimmune hepatitis
Sjögren’s syndrome

>95% Systemic sclerosis

75% RA
68% Normal

50%
≤40%
30%
2–10%

96%
30%
0–2%

ANA titres are expressed according to dilutions at which antibodies can be detected, ie 
1:160 means antibodies can still be detected after the serum has been diluted 160 times. 
Titres of 1:40 or 1:80 may not be signiﬁ cant. The pattern of staining may indicate the 
disease (although these are not speciﬁ c):

  • Homogeneous
  • Speckled

SLE
Mixed CT disease

  • Nucleolar
  • Centromere Limited systemic sclerosis

Systemic sclerosis

Anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA): SLE (60% sensitivity, but highly speciﬁ c).
Antihistone Ab: drug-induced SLE (~100%).
Antiphospholipid Ab (eg anti-cardiolipin Ab): antiphospholipid syndrome, SLE.
Anticentromere Ab: limited systemic sclerosis.
Anti-extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) antibodies (usually with +ve ANA):

  • Anti-Ro (SSA)

  • Anti-La (SSB)
  • Anti-Sm
  • Anti-RNP
  • Anti Jo-1; Anti-Mi-2
  • Anti-Scl70

SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic sclerosis. 
Associated with congenital heart block.
Sjögren’s syndrome, SLE (15%).
SLE (20–30%).
SLE, mixed connective tissue disease.
Polymyositis, dermatomyositis.
Diff use systemic sclerosis.

Gastrointestinal: (For liver autoantibodies, see p284.)
Antimitochondrial  Ab  (AMA):  primary  biliary  cholangitis  (>95%),  autoimmune 
hepatitis (30%), idiopathic cirrhosis (25–30%).
Anti-smooth muscle Ab (SMA): autoimmune hepatitis (70%), primary biliary chol-
angitis (50%), idiopathic cirrhosis (25–30%).
Gastric  parietal  cell  Ab:  pernicious  anaemia  (>90%),  atrophic  gastritis  (40%), 
‘normal’ (10%).
Intrinsic factor Ab: pernicious anaemia (50%).
-gliadin Ab, antitissue transglutaminase, anti-endomysial Ab: coeliac disease.
Endocrine:  Thyroid  peroxidase  Ab:  Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis  (~87%),  Graves’ 
(>50%). Islet cell Ab (ICA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) Ab: type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (75%).
Renal: Glomerular basement membrane Ab (anti-GBM): Goodpasture’s disease (100%).
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic Ab (ANCA):
  • Cytoplasmic (cANCA), speciﬁ c for serine proteinase-3 (PR3 +ve). Granulo matosis 
with  polyangiitis  (Wegener’s)  (90%);  also  microscopic  polyangiitis  (30%),  pol-
yarteritis nodosa (11%).

  • Perinuclear (pANCA), speciﬁ c for myeloperoxidase (MPO +ve). Microscopic poly-

angiitis (45%), Churg–Strauss, pulmonary-renal vasculitides (Goodpasture’s).

Unlike immune-complex vasculitis, in ANCA-associated vasculitis no comp lement 
consumption or immune complex deposition occurs (ie pauci-immune vasculitis). 42
ANCA may also be +ve in UC/Crohn’s, sclerosing cholangitis, auto immune hepatitis, 
Felty’s, RA, SLE, or drugs (eg antithyroid, allopurinol, ciproﬂ oxacin).
Neurological: Acetylcholine receptor Ab: myasthenia gravis (90%)(see p512).
Anti-voltage-gated K +-channel Ab: limbic encephalitis.
Anti-voltage-gated Ca 2+-channel Ab: Lambert–Eaton syndrome (see p512).
Anti-aquaporin 4: neuromyelitis optica (Devic’s disease, p698).

5  Most centres now use anti-CCP antibodies for the initial workup of suspected RA.

_OHCM_10e.indb   553

_OHCM_10e.indb   553

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

554

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

SLE is a multisystemic autoimmune disease. Autoantibodies are made against a vari-
ety of autoantigens (eg ANA) which form immune complexes . Inadequate clearance 
of  immune  complexes  results  in  a  host  of  immune  responses  which  cause  tissue 
inﬂ ammation and damage. Environmental triggers play a part (eg EBV p405).43 
Prevalence ~0.2%. :≈9:1, typically women of child-bearing age. Commoner in 
African-Caribbeans, Asians, and if HLA B8, DR2, or DR3 +ve. ~10% of patients have a 
1st- or 2nd-degree relative with SLE.
Clinical features See BOX. Remitting and relapsing illness of variable presentation 
and course. Features often non-speciﬁ c (malaise, fatigue, myalgia, and fever) or or-
gan-speciﬁ c and caused by active inﬂ ammation or damage. Other features include 
lymphadenopathy, weight loss, alopecia, nail-fold infarcts, non-infective endocarditis 
(Libman–Sacks syndrome), Raynaud’s (30%; see p708), stroke, and retinal exudates.
Immunology >95% are ANA +ve. A high anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) antibody 
titre is highly speciﬁ c, but only +ve in ~60% of cases. ENA (p553) may be +ve in 20–30% 
(anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Sm, anti-RNP); 40% are RhF +ve; antiphospholipid antibodies (an-
ticardiolipin or lupus anticoagulant) may also be +ve. SLE may be associated with other 
autoimmune conditions: Sjögren’s (15–20%), autoimmune thyroid disease (5–10%).
Diagnosis See BOX. Monitoring activity Three best tests: 1 Anti-dsDNA antibody ti-
tres. 2 Complement: C3, C4 (denotes consumption of complement, hence C3 and C4, 
and C3d and C4d, their degradation products). 3 ESR. Also: BP, urine for casts or pro-
tein (lupus nephritis, below), FBC, U&E, LFTs, CRP (usually normal) think of SLE when-
ever someone has a multisystem disorder and ESR but CRP normal. If CRP, think 
instead of infection, serositis, or arthritis. Skin or renal biopsies may be diagnostic.
Drug-induced lupus Causes (>80 drugs) include isoniazid, hydralazine (if >50mg/24h 
in slow acetylators), procainamide, quinidine, chlorpromazine, minocycline, phenyto-
in, anti-TNF agents. It is associated with antihistone antibodies in >95% of cases. Skin 
and lung signs prevail (renal and CNS are rarely aff ected). The disease remits if the 
drug is stopped. Sulfonamides or the oral contraceptive pill may worsen idiopathic SLE.
Management Refer: complex cases should involve specialist SLE/nephritis clinics.
  • General measures: High-factor sunblock. Hydroxychloroquine, unless contraindi-
cated, reduces disease activity and improves survival. Screen for co-morbidities 
and medication toxicity. For skin ﬂ ares, ﬁ rst trial topical steroids.

  • Maintenance: NSAIDs (unless renal disease) and hydroxychloroquine for joint and 
skin symptoms. Azathioprine, methotrexate, and mycophenolate as steroid-spar-
ing agents. Belimumab (monoclonal antibody) used as an add-on therapy for auto-
antibody positive disease where disease activity is high.44 (See BOX.)

  • Mild ﬂ ares: (No serious organ damage.) Hydroxychloroquine or low-dose steroids.
  • Moderate ﬂ ares: (Organ involvement.) May require DMARDs or mycophenolate.
Severe ﬂ ares: If life- or organ-threatening, eg haemolytic anaemia, nephritis, 
severe pericarditis or CNS disease; urgent high-dose steroids, mycophenolate, rituxi-
mab, cyclophosphamide. MDT working vital for neuropsychiatric lupus (psychometric 
testing, lumbar puncture may be indicated).
Lupus nephritis: (p314.) May require more intensive immunosuppression with ster-
oids and cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate. BP control vital (e.g. ACE-i). Renal re-
placement therapy (p306) may be needed if disease progresses; nephritis recurs in 
~50% post-transplant, but is a rare cause of graft failure.45
Prognosis: ~80% survival at 15 years.43 There is an increased long-term risk of CVD 
and osteoporosis.
Antiphospholipid syndrome Can be associated with SLE (20–30%). Often occurs 
as  a  primary  disease.  Antiphospholipid  antibodies (anticardiolipin  & lupus  antico-
agulant, anti- 2 glycoprotein 1) cause CLOTS: Coagulation defect (arterial/venous), 
Livedo  reticularis  (p557),  Obstetric  (recurrent  miscarriage),  Thrombocytopenia. 
Thrombotic tendency aff ects cerebral, renal, and other vessels. Dx: Persistent an-
tiphosphlolipid antibodies with clinical features. : Anticoagulation; seek advice in 
pregnancy.46

_OHCM_10e.indb   554

_OHCM_10e.indb   554

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

555

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics Classiﬁ cation
A favourite diff erential diagnosis, SLE mimics other illnesses, with wide variation in 
symptoms that may come and go unpredictably. Diagnose SLE47 in an appropriate 
clinical setting if ≥4 criteria (at least 1 clinical and 1 laboratory) or biopsy-proven 
lupus nephritis with positive ANA or anti-DNA.
Clinical criteria

1      Acute cutaneous lupus: Malar rash/butterﬂ y. Fixed erythema, ﬂ at or raised, 
over  the  malar  eminences,  tending  to  spare  the  nasolabial  folds  (ﬁ g 12.14). 
Occurs in up to 50%. Bullous lupus, toxic epidermal necrolysis variant of SLE, 
maculopapular lupus rash, photosensitive lupus rash, or subacute cutaneous 
lupus (non-indurated psoriasiform and/or annular polycyclic lesions that re-
solve without scarring).

2      Chronic cutaneous lupus: Discoid rash, erythematous raised patches with ad-
herent keratotic scal es and follicular plugging ± atrophic scarring (ﬁ g 12.15). 
Think of it as a three-stage rash aff ecting ears, cheeks, scalp, forehead, and 
chest:  erythemapigmented  hyperkeratotic  oedematous  papulesatrophic 
depressed lesions.

3      Non scarring alopecia: (In the absence of other causes.)
4       Oral/nasal ulcers: (In the absence of other causes.)
5      Synovitis: (Involving two or more joints or two or more tender joints with >30 

minutes of morning stiff ness.)

6      Serositis: a) Lung (pleurisy for >1 day, or pleural eff usions, or pleural rub; b) 
pericardial pain for >1 day, or pericardial eff usion, or pericardial rub, or peri-
carditis on ECG.

7      Urinanalysis: Presence of proteinuria (>0.5g/d ) or red cell casts.
8      Neurological features: Seizures; psychosis; mononeuritis multiplex; myelitis; 
peripheral or cranial neuropathy; cerebritis/acute confusional state in absence 
of other causes.

9      Haemolytic anaemia.
10      Leucopenia: (WCC <4.) At least once, or lymphopenia (lymphocytes <1) at least 

once.

11      Thrombocytopenia: (Platelets <100.) At least once.
Laboratory criteria

1      +ve ANA (+ve in >95%).
2      Anti-dsDNA.
3      Anti-Smith antibodies present.
4      Antiphospholipid Abs present.
5      Low complement (C3, C4, or C50).
6      +ve Direct Coombs test.

Adapted from 'Derivation and validation of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics 
classiﬁ cation criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus'. Petri M et al., Arthritis and Rheumatism, 
vol 64, issue 8 (2012) 2677–2686.

Fig  12.14  Malar  rash,  with  sparing  of  the 
nasolabial folds.

Courtesy of David F. Fiorentino, MD, PhD; 
by kind permission of Skin & Aging.

Fig 12.15  Discoid rash.

Courtesy of Amy McMichael, MD; 
by kind permission of Skin & Aging.

_OHCM_10e.indb   555

_OHCM_10e.indb   555

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

556

Vasculitis

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

The vasculitides are inﬂ ammatory disorders of blood vessels; commonly classiﬁ ed 
using the modiﬁ ed Chapel Hill criteria.48 They can aff ect any organ, and presentation 
depends on the organs involved. It may be a primary condition or secondary to other 
diseases, eg SLE, RA, hepatitis B & C, HIV. Categorized by size of blood vessels aff ected.
• Large Giant cell arteritis, Takayasu’s arteritis (see p712).
• Medium Polyarteritis nodosa, Kawasaki disease (OHCS p646).
• Small • ANCA-associated: microscopic polyangiitis; granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s granulomatosis); and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg 
Strauss syndrome; 40–60% are ANCA positive). • Immune complex vasculitis: Goodpas-
ture’s disease; cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis; IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein purpura).

• Variable vessel vasculitis Behçet’s (p694) and Cogan’s syndrome.
Symptoms Diff erent vasculitides preferentially aff ect diff erent organs, causing dif-
ferent patterns of symptoms (see BOX ‘Features of vasculitis’), Often only overwhelm-
ing  fatigue  with  ESR/CRP.  Consider  vasculitis  in  any  unidentiﬁ ed  multisystem 
disorder. If presentation does not ﬁ t clinically or serologically into a speciﬁ c cat-
egory consider malignancy-associated vasculitis. A severe vasculitis ﬂ are is a medi-
cal emergency. If suspected, seek urgent help, as organ damage may occur rapidly 
(eg critical renal failure <24h). Tests ESR/CRP. ANCA may be +ve. Creatinine if renal 
failure. Urine: proteinuria, haematuria, casts on microscopy. Angiography ± biopsy 
may be diagnostic. Management Large-vessel: steroids in most cases, may add ster-
oid-sparing agents later. Medium/small: immunosuppression (steroids, ± another agent, 
eg cyclophosphamide if severe, or methotrexate/azathioprine depending on features).
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) = temporal arteritis Common in the elderly—consider 
Takayasu’s if under 55yrs (p712). Associated with PMR in 50%. Symptoms: Headache, 
temporal  artery  and  scalp  tenderness  (eg  when  combing  hair),  tongue/jaw  clau-
dication, amaurosis fugax, or sudden unliateral blindness. Extracranial symptoms: 
malaise, dyspnoea, weight loss, morning stiff ness, and unequal or weak pulses.49 The 
risk is irreversible bilateral visual loss, which can occur suddenly if not treated—ask 
an ophthalmologist. Tests: ESR & CRP are , platelets, ALP, Hb. Temporal artery bi-
opsy within 14 days of starting steroids, or FDG-PET. Skip lesions occur, so don’t be 
put off  by a negative biopsy (up to 10%). Management: Start prednisolone 60mg/d 
PO immediately or IV methylprednisolone if evolving visual loss or history of amau-
rosis fugax.50 Prognosis: Typically a 2-year course, then complete remission. Reduce 
prednisolone once symptoms have resolved and ESR; dose if symptoms recur. Main 
cause of death and morbidity in GCA is long-term steroid treatment so balance risks! Give 
PPI, bisphosphonate, calcium with colecalciferol, and consider aspirin.6; 51
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) PAN is a necrotizing vasculitis that causes aneurysms 
and thrombosis in medium-sized arteries, leading to infarction in aff ected organs 
with severe systemic symptoms. :≈2:1. It may be associated with hepatitis  B, 
and is rare in the UK. Symptoms: See BOX. Systemic features, skin (rash, ‘punched 
out’ ulcers, nodules), renal (main cause of death, renal artery narrowing, glomerular 
ischaemia, insuffi  ciency, HTN), cardiac, GI, GU, neuro involvement. Usually spares lungs. 
Coronary aneurysms occur in Kawasaki disease (OHCS p646). Tests: Often WCC, mild 
eosino philia (in 30%), anaemia, ESR, CRP, ANCA Ωve. Renal or mesenteric angiography 
(see ﬁ g 12.16), or renal biopsy can be diagnostic. Treatment: Control BP and refer. 
Steroids for mild cases and steroid-sparing agents if more severe. Hepatitis B should 
be treated (p278) after initial treatment with steroids.52
Microscopic  polyangiitis  A  necrotizing  vasculitis  aff ecting  small-  and  medium-
sized vessels. Symptoms: Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis usually features; 
pulmonary haemorrhage occurs in up to 30%; other features are rare. Tests: pANCA 
(MPO) +ve (p553). Treatment: Steroids plus eg methotrexate. For maintenance: meth-
otrexate, rituximab, or azathioprine.
Hypocomplementaemic urticarial vasculitis A lupus-like illness with urticaria 
and antibodies to complement (C1q).

6  Low-dose aspirin has been shown to decrease the rate of visual loss and cerebrovascular accidents in GCA 
but there are also conﬂ icting reports regarding its effi  cacy at preventing ischaemic events in GCA.

_OHCM_10e.indb   556

_OHCM_10e.indb   556

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

557

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Features of vasculitis
The presentation of vasculitis will depend on the organs aff ected:
Systemic: Fever, malaise, weight loss, arthralgia, myalgia.
Skin: Purpura, ulcers, livedo reticularis (ﬁ g 12.17), nailbed infarcts, digital gangrene.
Eyes: Episcleritis, scleritis, visual loss.
ENT: Epistaxis, nasal crusting, stridor, deafness.
Pulmonary: Haemoptysis and dyspnoea (due to pulmonary haemorrhage).
Cardiac: Angina or MI (due to coronary arteritis), heart failure, and pericarditis.
GI: Pain or perforation (infarcted viscus), malabsorption (chronic ischaemia).
Renal: Hypertension, haematuria, proteinuria, casts, and renal failure (renal corti-
cal infarcts; glomerulonephritis in ANCA +ve vasculitis).
Neurological:  Stroke,  ﬁ ts,  chorea,  psych o sis, confusion,  impaired  cognition,  al-
tered mood. Arteritis of the vasa nervorum (arterial supply to peripheral nerves) 
may cause mononeuritis multiplex or a sensorimotor polyneuropathy.53
GU: Orchitis—testicular pain or tenderness.

Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) 
PMR is not a true vasculitis and its pathogenesis is unknown. PMR and GCA share 
the same demographic characteristics and, although separate conditions, the two 
frequently occur together.
Features: Age >50yrs; subacute onset (<2 weeks) of bilateral aching, tenderness, 
and morning stiff ness in shoulders, hips, and proximal limb muscles ± fatigue, fe-
ver, weight, anorexia, and depression. There may be associated mild poly arthritis, 
tenosynovitis, and carpal tunnel syndrome (10%). Weakness is not a feature.
Investigations: CRP, ESR typically >40 (but may be normal); AlkP is  in 30%. Note 
creatinine kinase levels are normal (helping to distinguish from myositis/myopathies).
Differential diagnoses: Recent-onset RA, polymyositis, hypothyroidism, primary 
muscle disease, occult malignancy or infection, osteoarthritis (especially cervical 
spondylosis, shoulder OA), neck lesions, bilateral subacromial impingement (OHCS 
p666), spinal stenosis (OHCS p676).
Management:  Prednisolone  15mg/d  PO.  Expect  a  dramatic  response  within  1 
week and consider an alternative diagnosis if not.  dose slowly, eg by 1mg/month 
(according to symptoms/ESR). Investigate apparent ‘ﬂ ares’ during withdrawal— 
attributable to another condition? Most need steroids for ≥2yrs, so give bone pro-
tection. Addition of methotrexate may be considered, under specialist supervision, 
for patients at risk of relapse/prolonged therapy. NSAIDS are not eff ective. Inform 
patients to seek urgent review if symptoms of GCA develop.

Fig 12.16  Renal angiogram showing 
multiple aneurysms in PAN.

Courtesy of Dr William Herring.

Fig 12.17  Livedo reticularis: pink–blue 
mottling  caused  by  capillary  dilata-
tion and stasis in skin venules. Causes: 
physio l ogical, cold, or vasculitis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   557

_OHCM_10e.indb   557

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

558

Fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome are part of a diff use group of overlap-
ping syndromes, sharing similar demographic and clinical characteristics, in which 
chronic symptoms of fatigue and widespread pain feature prominently. Their exist-
ence as discrete entities is controversial, especially in the absence of clear pathol-
ogy, and some ﬁ nd such dysfunctional diagnoses frustrating. However, a correct 
diagnosis enables the doctor to give appropriate counselling and advise appropriate 
therapies, and allows the patient to begin to accept and deal with their symptoms.
Fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia comprises up to 10% of new referrals to the rheumatology clinic.54
Prevalence: 0.5–4%. :≈6:1 but varies depending on which diagnostic criteria are 
used .
Risk factors: BOX ‘Risk factors’. Female sex, middle age, low household income, di-
vorced, low educational status.
Associations: Other somatic syndromes such as chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable 
bowel syndrome (p266), and chronic headaches syndromes (see  OHCS p502). Also 
found in ~25% of patients with RA, AS, and SLE.
Features: Diagnosis depends on pain that is chronic (>3 months) and widespread 
(involves left and right sides, above and below the waist, and the axial skeleton). 
Profound  fatigue  is  almost  universal  with  complaint  of  unrefreshing  sleep  and 
signiﬁ cant  fatigue  and  pain  with  small  increases  in  physical  exertion.  Additional 
features: morning stiff ness (~80–90%), paraesthesiae (without underlying cause), 
headaches (migraine and tension), poor concentration, low mood, and sleep distur-
bance (~70%). Widespread and severe tender points.
Investigations: All normal. Diagnosis is clinical. Over-investigation can consolidate 
illness behaviour; but exclude other causes of pain and/or fatigue (eg RA, PMR see 
p557, vasculitis see p556, hypothyroidism see p220, myeloma see p368).
Management: Multidisciplinary with optimal results coming from full engagement 
of the patient who should be encouraged to remain as active as they feel able, and 
ideally to continue to participate in the workforce. New symptoms should be fully 
reviewed to exclude an alternative diagnosis. Patients should be advised that there 
is no one speciﬁ c treatment that is guaranteed to work, but any of the following may 
help: graded exercise programmes, including both aerobic and strength-based train-
ing. Pacing of activity is vital to avoid over-exertion and consequent pain and fatigue. 
Long-term  graded  exercise  programmes  improve  functional  capacity.55, 56  Relaxa-
tion, rehabilitation and physiotherapy may also help. Cognitive-behavioural therapy 
(CBT) aims to help patients develop coping strategies and set achievable goals.57
Pharmacotherapy: Low-dose amitriptyline (eg 10–20mg at night) has been shown 
to help relieve pain and improve sleep. Pregabalin (150–300mg/12h PO) can be used if 
amitriptyline is ineff ective. Duloxetine or an SSRI can be used for ﬁ bromyalgia with 
comorbid anxiety and depression. Steroids or NSAIDS are not recommended because 
there is no inﬂ ammation (if it does respond, reconsider your diagnosis!).
Chronic fatigue syndrome (AKA myalgic encephalomyelitis)
Chronic  fatigue  syndrome58  is  deﬁ ned  as  persistent  disabling  fatigue  lasting  >6 
months, aff ecting mental and physical function, present >50% of the time, plus ≥4 
of: myalgia (~80%), polyarthralgia, memory, unrefreshing sleep, fatigue after exer-
tion >24h, persistent sore throat, tender cervical/axillary lymph nodes. Management 
principles are similar to ﬁ bromyalgia and include graded exercise and CBT. No phar-
macological agents have yet been proved eff ective for chronic fatigue syndrome 
(see also OHCS p502).

_OHCM_10e.indb   558

_OHCM_10e.indb   558

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

559

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Risk factors: yellow ﬂ ags
Psychosocial  risk  factors  for  developing  persisting  chronic  pain  and  long-term 
disability have been termed ‘yellow ﬂ ags’: 59
Belief that pain and activity are harmful.
Sickness behaviours such as extended rest.
Social withdrawal.
Emotional problems such as low mood, anxiety, or stress.
Problems or dissatisfaction at work.
Problems with claims for compensation or time off  work.
Overprotective family or lack of support.
Inappropriate expectations of treatment, eg low active participation in treatment.

An existential approach to diffi  cult symptoms
The  manner  in  which  management  is  discussed  is  almost  as  important  as  the 
management itself, which should focus on education of the patient and their fam-
ily and on developing coping strategies. Such a diagnosis may be a relief or a 
disappointment to the patient. Explain that ﬁ bromyalgia is a relapsing and re-
mitting condition, with no easy cures, and that they will continue to have good 
and bad days. Reassure them that there is no serious underlying pathology, that 
their joints are not being damaged, and that no further tests are necessary, but 
be sympathetic to the fact that they may have been seeking a physical cause for 
their symptoms.

We all at some stage come across a patient with diffi  cult symptoms and an 
exasperating  lack  of  pathology  to  explain  them.  Investigations  are  all  normal, 
and medications do not seem to work. It is tempting to dismiss such patients as 
malingerers, but often this conclusion comes from the clinician approaching the 
problem from the wrong angle. The patient has symptoms that are real and disa-
bling to them, and that will not improve without help. Perhaps a more pragmatic 
approach is to take advice from the Danish philosopher Kierkegaard who wrote to 
a friend in 1835, ‘What I really lack is to be clear in my mind what I am to do, not 
what I am to know ... The thing is to understand myself ... to ﬁ nd a truth which is 
true for me.’ Listen to the patient and accept their story. Then help them to focus 
on what they can do to improve their situation, and to move away from dwelling 
on ﬁ nding a physical answer to their symptoms.

Pathogenesis of ﬁ bromyalgia
The current hypothesis is that ﬁ bromyalgia is caused by aberrant peripheral and 
central pain processing. Two key features of the condition are allodynia (pain in re-
sponse to a non-painful stimulus) and hyperaesthesia (exaggerated perception of 
pain in response to a mildly painful stimulus), examined for by palpation of tender 
points. Research is beginning to suggest that certain antidepressants can relieve 
pain and other symptoms, and especially those that have both serotonergic and 
noradrenergic activity (tricyclics and venlafaxine). Those acting on serotonergic 
receptors only are less eff ective. There is also some evidence to support the use 
of alternative therapies such as acupuncture and spa therapies, which have been 
postulated  to  act  through  similar  spinal  pain-modulatory  pathways.60  Thus  far, 
trials have involved relatively small numbers of patients or short time periods, 
and lack the power to draw strong conclusions. However, it is interesting to note 
that the CSF of patients with ﬁ bromyalgia appears to have increased levels of sub-
stance P, while levels of noradrenaline and serotonin metabolites are decreased. 
All three are neurotransmitters involved in descending pain-modulatory pathways 
in the spinal cord.61, 62 Evidence from PET imaging suggests that patients with ﬁ bro-
myalgia may have an abnormal central dopamine response to pain.63 The critical 
question is: is this cause or eff ect?

_OHCM_10e.indb   559

_OHCM_10e.indb   559

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

560

Systemic conditions causing eye signs

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

The eye is host to many diseases: the more you look, the more you’ll see, and the 
more you’ll enjoy, not least because the eye is as beautiful as its signs are legion.
Behçet’s (p694.) Systemic inﬂ ammatory disorder, HLA B27 association. Causes a uvei-
tis amongst other systemic manifestations. Cause unknown.
Granulomatous disorders Syphilis,  TB, sarcoidosis, leprosy, brucellosis, and tox-
oplasmosis may inﬂ ame either the front chamber (anterior uveitis/iritis) or back 
chamber (posterior uveitis/choroiditis). Refer to an ophthalmologist.
Systemic inﬂ ammatory diseases May manifest as iritis in ankylosing spondylitis 
and reactive arthritis; uveitis in Behçet’s; conjunctivitis in reactive arthritis; scle-
ritis or episcleritis in RA, vasculitis, and SLE. Scleritis in RA and granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis  (Wegener’s)  may  damage  the  eye.  Refer  urgently  if  eye  pain.  GCA 
causes optic nerve ischaemia presenting as sudden blindness.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca A reduction in tear formation, tested by the Schirmer 
ﬁ lter paper test (<5mm in 5min). It causes a gritty feeling in the eyes, and a dry 
mouth (xerostomia from saliva production). It is found on its own (Sjögren’s syn-
drome), or with other diseases, eg SLE, RA, sarcoidosis. : Artiﬁ cial tears/saliva.
Hypertensive  retinopathy  BP  damages 
retinal  vessels.  Hardened  ar-
teries  are  shiny  (‘silver  wiring’;  ﬁ g  12.18)  and  ‘nip’  veins  where  they  cross 
(AV nipping; ﬁ g 12.19). Narrowed arterioles may become blocked, causing localized 
retinal infarction, seen as cotton-wool spots. Leaks from these in severe hyperten-
sion manifest as hard exudates or macular oedema. Papilloedema (ﬁ g 12.20) or ﬂ ame 
haemorrhages suggest accelerated hypertension (p138) requiring urgent treatment.
Vascular  occlusion  Emboli  passing  through  the  retinal  vasculature  may  cause 
retinal artery occlusion (global or segmental retinal pallor) or amaurosis fugax 
(p476).  Roth  spots  (small  retinal  infarcts  occur  in  infective  endocarditis.  In  der-
matomyositis, there is orbital oedema with retinopathy showing cotton-wool spots 
(micro-infarcts).  Retinal  vein  occlusion  is  caused  by  BP,  age,  or  hyperviscosity 
(p372). Suspect in any acute fall in acuity. If it is the central vein, the fundus is like a 
stormy sunset (those angry red clouds are haemorrhages). In branch vein occlusion, 
changes are conﬁ ned to a wedge of retina. Get expert help.
Haematological  disorders  Retinal  haemorrhages  occur  in  leukaemia;  comma-
shaped conjunctival haemorrhages and retinal new vessel formation may occur in 
sickle-cell disease. Optic atrophy is seen in pernicious anaemia (and also MS).
Metabolic disease Diabetes mellitus: p210. Hyperthyroid exophthalmos: p219. Lens 
opacities are seen in hypoparathyroidism. Conjunctival and corneal calciﬁ cation can 
occur in hypercalcaemia. In gout, conjunctival urate deposits may cause sore eyes.
Systemic infections Septicaemia may seed to the vitreous causing endophth al-
mitis. Syphilis can cause iritis (+ pigmented retinopathy if congenital). Systemic fun-
gal infections may aff ect the eye, eg in the immunocompromised or in IV drug users, 
requiring  intra-vitreal  antibiotics.  AIDS  and  HIV  CMV  retinitis  (pizza-pie  fundus—a 
mixture of cotton-wool spots, inﬁ ltrates, and haemorrhages, p438) may be asympto-
matic but can cause sudden visual loss. If present, it implies AIDS (CD4 count <100 ≈ 
106/L; p398). Cotton-wool spots on their own indicate HIV retinopathy and may occur 
in early disease. Kaposi’s sarcoma may aff ect the lids (non-tender purple nodule) or 
conjunctiva (red ﬂ eshy mass).

Fig 12.18  Silver wiring.

Fig 12.19  AV nipping.

Fig 12.20  Papilloedema.

©Prof Jonathan Trobe.

©Prof Jonathan Trobe.

©Prof Jonathan Trobe.

_OHCM_10e.indb   560

_OHCM_10e.indb   560

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

5

5

6

6

1

1

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

8

8

Table 12.5  Diff erential diagnosis of a red eye

Conjunctiva

Iris

Pupil

Acute glaucoma Both ciliary and conjunctival vessels injected.

Injected Dilated,

Entire eye is red.
See OHCS p430.

ﬁ xed,
oval

Cornea

Steamy,
hazy

Anterior
chamber
Very shal-
low

Intraocular
pressure
Very high

Anterior uveitis 
(iritis) 

Conjunctivitis

Redness most marked around cornea, which 
doesn’t blanch on pressure. Usually unilateral.
Causes: AS, RA, Reiter’s sarcoidosis, herpes 
simplex, herpes zoster, and Behçet’s disease. 
NB: a similar scleral appearance but without 
papillary or anterior chamber involvement 
may be scleritis (eg RA, SLE, vasculitis).
Often bilateral.
Conjunctival vessels injected, greatest toward 
fornices, but blanching on pressure.
Mobile over sclera.
Purulent discharge.

Subconjunctival 
haemorrhage

Bright red sclera with white rim around 
limbus. Causes: BP; leptospirosis; bleeding 
disorders; trauma; snake venom; haemor-
rhagic fevers.

Injected Small, 

Normal Turgid

Normal

irregular due 
to adhesions 
between the 
anterior lens 
and the pupil 
margin
Normal Normal

Normal Normal

Normal

Normal Normal

Normal Normal

Normal

Treatment

Appearance

Refer.
IV acetazolamide + 
pilocarpine drops 
(miotic); peripheral 
iridotomy.

Refer.
Steroid eye drops 
(eg 0.5% predniso-
lone) + mydriatic 
(eg cyclopentolate 
0.5%).

Most do not require 
treatment.
Consider chloram-
phenicol ointment 
or drops.
Looks alarming but 
resolves spontane-
ously. Check BP 
if elderly; refer 
if traumatic; on 
warfarin?

Images courtesy of Prof. Jonathan Trobe.

Rheumatology

5
6
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
562

Skin manifestations of systemic diseases

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Erythema nodosum (ﬁ g 12.21) Painful, blue-red, raised lesions on shins (± thighs/
arms). Causes: sarcoidosis, drugs (sulfonamides, contraceptive pill, dapsone), strep-
tococcal  infection.  Less  common:  IBD,  BCG  vaccination,  leptospirosis,  Mycobacte-
rium (TB, leprosy), Yersinia, or various viruses and fungi. Cause unknown in 30–50%.
Erythema multiforme (See OHCS p588.) (ﬁ g 12.22) ‘Target’ lesions: symmetrical ± 
central  blister,  on  palms/soles,  limbs,  and  elsewhere.  Stevens–Johnson  syndrome 
(p710): a rare,  severe variant with fever and mucosal involvement (mouth, genital, and 
eye ulcers), associated with a hypersensitivity reaction to drugs (NSAIDS, sulfonamides, 
anticonvulsants, allopurinol), or infections (herpes, Mycoplasma, orf). Also seen in col-
lagen disorders. 50% of cases are idiopathic. Get expert help in severe disease.
Erythema migrans (ﬁ g 12.23) Presents as a small papule at the site of a tick bite 
which develops into a spreading large erythematous ring, with central fading. It lasts 
from 48h to 3 months and there may be multiple lesions in disseminated disease. Cause: 
the rash is pathognomonic of Lyme disease and occurs in ~80% of cases (p422).
Erythema marginatum Pink coalescent rings on trunk which come and go. It is 
seen in rheumatic fever (or rarely other causes, eg drugs). See ﬁ g 3.42, p143.
Pyoderma gangrenosum (ﬁ g 12.24) Recurring nodulo-pustular ulcers, ~10cm wide, 
with tender red/blue overhanging necrotic edge, purulent surface, and healing with 
cribriform scars on leg, abdomen, or face. Associations: IBD, autoimmune hepatitis, 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), myeloma, neoplasia. >. Treatment: 
get help. Oral steroids ± ciclosporin should be 1st-line therapy.64
Vitiligo (ﬁ g 12.25) Vitellus is Latin for spotted calf: typically white patches ± hyper-
pigmented borders. Sunlight makes them itch. Associations: autoimmune disorders; 
premature ovarian failure. Treat by camouﬂ age cosmetics and sunscreens (± steroid 
creams ± dermabrasion). UK Vitiligo Society: 0800 018 2631.

Speciﬁ c diseases and their skin manifestations

Crohn’s Perianal/vulval/oral ulcers; erythema nodosum; pyoderma gangrenosum.
Dermatomyositis Gottron’s papules (rough red papules on the knuckles/extensor 
surfaces); shawl sign; heliotrope rash on eyelids (ﬁ g 12.26). It may be associated with 
lung, bowel, ovarian, or pancreatic malignancy (p552).
Diabetes mellitus Ulcers, necrobiosis lipoidica (shiny yellowish area on shin ± tel-
angiectasia; ﬁ g 12.27), granuloma annulare (OHCS p586), acanthosis nigricans (pig-
mented, rough thickening of axillary, neck, or groin skin with warty lesions; ﬁ g 12.28).
Coeliac disease Dermatitis herpetiformis: Itchy blisters, in groups on knees, el-
bows, and scalp. The itch (which can drive patients to suicide) responds to dapsone 
25–200mg/24h PO within 48h—and this may be used as a diagnostic test. The mainte-
nance dose may be as little as 50mg/wk. A gluten-free diet should be adhered to, but 
in 30% dapsone will need to be continued. SE (dose-related): haemolysis (CI: anaemia, 
G6PD-deﬁ ciency), hepatitis, agranulocytosis (monitor FBC and LFTS). There is an  risk 
of  small  bowel  lymphoma  with  coeliac  disease  and  dermatitis  herpetiformis—so 
surveillance is needed.
Hyperthyroidism Pretibial myxoedema: Red oedematous swellings above lateral 
malleoli,  progressing  to  thickened  oedema  of  legs  and  feet,  thyroid  acropachy—
clubbing + subperiosteal new bone in phalanges. Other endocrinopathies: p203.
Liver  disease  Palmar  erythema;  spider  naevi;  gynaecomastia;  decrease  in  pubic 
hair; jaundice; bruising; scratch marks.
Malabsorption Dry pigmented skin, easy bruising, hair loss, leuconychia.
Neoplasia  Acanthosis  nigricans:  (See  ‘Diabetes  mellitus’  and  ﬁ g  12.28.)  Associ-
ated with gastric cancer. Dermatomyositis: see earlier in topic. Thrombophlebitis 
migrans:  Successive  crops  of  tender  nodules  aff ecting  blood  vessels  throughout 
the body, associated with pancreatic cancer (especially body and tail). Acquired 
ichthyosis: Dry scaly skin associated with lymphoma. Skin metastases: Especially 
melanoma, and colonic, lung, breast, laryngeal/oral, or ovarian malignancy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   562

_OHCM_10e.indb   562

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

563

l

y
g
o
o
t
a
m
u
e
h
R

Fig 12.21  Erythema nodosum.

Fig 12.25  Vitiligo. Compare with ﬁ g 9.58, p441.

Fig 12.22  Erythema multiforme.

Fig 12.26  Heliotrope rash.
Courtesy of Nick Taylor, East Sussex Hospitals Trust.

Fig 12.23  Erythema migrans.

Courtesy of CDC/James Gathany.

Fig 12.27  Necrobiosis lipoidica.

Reproduced from Warrell et al., Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 12.24  Pyoderma gangrenosum.

Reproduced from BMJ, ‘Diagnosis and treatment of 
pyoderma gangrenosum’, Brooklyn et al., 333: 181-4, 
2006; with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

Fig 12.28  Acanthosis nigricans.

Reproduced from Lewis-Jones, Paediatric 
Dermatology, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   563

_OHCM_10e.indb   563

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

13  Surgery
564

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Contents
Language of surgery  565

Perioperative care:
Pre-operative care  566
Consent  568
Prophylactic antibiotics in surgery  570
Sutures  571
Anaesthesia  572
The control of pain  574
General post-op complications  576
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)  578
Swollen legs  579
Speciﬁ c post-op complications  580
Stoma care  582
Nutritional support in hospital  584–7
Speciﬁ c patient groups  588–91
Minimally invasive and day case 

surgery  592

Lumps in head, neck & skin: 594–601

Breast surgery: 602

GI surgery:
Abdominal masses  604
The acute abdomen  606
Acute appendicitis  608
Obstruction of the bowel  610
Hernias  612–5
Colorectal carcinoma  616
Gastro-oesophageal carcinomas  618
Bowel ischaemia  620
Gastric surgery and its aftermath  622
Fundoplication for GORD  624 
Oesophageal rupture  624
Surgical management of obesity  626
Diverticular disease  628
Perianal problems  630
Haemorrhoids 632

Hepatobiliary  surgery: 634–7

Urology:
Renal stones  638
Urinary tract obstruction  640
Benign prostatic hyperplasia  642
Retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis  643
Urinary tract malignancies  644
Bladder tumours  646
Urinary incontinence  648
Lumps in the groin and scrotum  650
Testes  652

Vascular surgery:
Aneurysms of arteries  654
Thoracic aortic dissection 655
Peripheral arterial disease 656
Varicose veins (VVS)  658
Gangrene and necrotizing fasciitis 660
Skin ulcers 660

Fig 13.1  The Da Vinci robot, the ﬁ rst robotic 
surgery  system  to  receive  regulatory  ap-
proval.  With  4  arms,  tiny,  wristed  tremor-
free  joints  with  multiple  axes  of  rotation 
and high-resolution 3D imaging, the system 
off ers the potential for signiﬁ cant advances 
in minimally invasive surgery, which are cur-
rently being realized across a range of ﬁ elds. 
But where is the surgeon in this picture? At 
ﬁ rst glance, this technological tour de force 
may appear to supplant the skill of the hu-
man  surgeon—yet  the  machine  must  still 
possess  an  operator  who  must  train  and 
achieve all of the skills necessary to perform 
this challenging surgery. The history of sur-
gery  is  one  of  adaptation  of  surgical  skills 
to new technologies, from anaesthesia and 
asepsis to organ transplantation and lapa-
roscopy. How can training pathways adapt 
in turn to allow for acquisition of these new 
skills  without  unacceptable  patient  risk? 
And whatever the surgical approach, the old 
maxim remains the same: the art of surgery 
lies  in  selecting  the  right  operation  at  the 
right time for the right patient. 

We thank Mr Antonio Foliaki, our Specialist Reader for this chapter, and Mr William Breakey, for their 
contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   564

_OHCM_10e.indb   564

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

T he language of surgery

1      Right upper quadrant (RUQ) or hypochondrium.
2      Epigastrium.
3      Left upper quadrant (LUQ) or hypochondrium.
4      Right ﬂ ank (merges posteriorly with right loin, p57).
5      Periumbilical or central area.
6      Left ﬂ ank (merges posteriorly with left loin, p57).
7      Right iliac fossa (RIF).
8      Suprapubic area.
9      Left iliac fossa (LIF).

Fig 13.2  Abdominal areas.

565
565

y
y
r
r
e
e
g
g
r
r
u
u
S
S

Fig 13.3  Incisions.

-ectomy 
-gram 
-pexy 
-plasty 
-scopy 
-stomy 
-tomy 
-tripsy 
angio- 
appendic-  Appendix 
chole- 
colp- 
cyst- 
-doch- 
enter- 
eschar- 
gastr- 
hepat- 
hyster- 
lapar- 
abscess 
colic 
cyst 
ﬁ stula 

Cutting something out.
A radiological image.
Anchoring of a structure to keep it in position.
Surgical refashioning in order to regain function/cosmesis.
Procedure with instrumentation for looking into the body.
An artiﬁ cial union between a conduit and the outside or another conduit.
Cutting something open to the outside world.
Fragmentation of an object.
Tube or vessel 

lith- 
mast- 
meso- 
nephr- 
orchid- 
oophor- 
phren- 
pyloro- 
pyel- 
proct- 
salping- 
splen- 

Stone
Breast
Mesentery
Kidney
Testicle
Ovary
Diaphragm
Pyloric sphincter
Renal pelvis
Anal canal
Fallopian tube
Spleen

Relating to gall/bile 
Vagina 
Bladder 
Ducts 
Small bowel 
Dead tissue, eg from burn 
Stomach 
Liver 
Uterus 
Abdomen 
A cavity containing pus. Remember: if there is pus about, let it out.
Intermittent pain from over-contraction/obstruction of a hollow viscus.
Fluid-ﬁ lled cavity lined by epi/endothelium.
An abnormal connection between two epithelial surfaces. Fistulae often 
close spontaneously, but will not in the presence of malignant tissue, dis-
tal obstruction, foreign bodies, chronic inﬂ ammation, and the formation 
of a muco-cutaneous junction (eg stoma).
The protrusion of a viscus/part of a viscus through a defect of the wall of 
its containing cavity into an abnormal position.
Used in this book as a term for adynamic bowel.
A  blind-ending  tract,  typically  lined  by  epithelial  or  granulation  tissue, 
which opens to an epithelial surface.
An artiﬁ cial tube placed in a biological tube to keep it open.
(p582) An artiﬁ cial union between conduits or a conduit and the outside.
(p660) Interruption in the continuity of an epi/endothelial surface.
(p611) Twisting of a structure around itself. Common GI sites include the 
sigmoid colon and caecum, and more rarely the stomach.
peri- 
Upon 
sub- 
Inside 
trans- 
Enlarged 

Whole 
Alongside 
Going through 

Around
Beneath
Across

pan- 
para- 
per- 

hernia 

ileus 
sinus 

stent 
stoma 
ulcer 
volvulus 

epi- 
end- 
mega- 

_OHCM_10e.indb   565

_OHCM_10e.indb   565

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

566

Pre-operative care

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Aims To provide diagnostic and prognostic information. Ensures the patient under-
stands the nature, aims, and expected outcome of surgery. To allay anxiety and pain:
  • Ensure that the right patient gets the right surgery. Have the symptoms and signs 

changed? If so, inform the surgeon.

  • Assess/balance risks of anaesthesia, and maximize ﬁ tness. Comorbidities? Drugs? 

Smoker? Optimizing oxygenation before major surgery improves outcome.

  • Obtain informed consent (p568).
  • Check proposed anaesthesia/analgesia with anaesthetist.
Family history May be relevant, eg in malignant hyperpyrexia (p572); dystrophia 
myotonica (p510); porphyria; cholinesterase problems; sickle-cell disease.
Drugs  Any  drug/plaster/antiseptic  allergies?  Inform  the  anaesthetist  about  all 
drugs even if ‘over-the-counter’. Steroids: see p590; diabetes: see p588.
  • Antibiotics: Tetracycline and neomycin may  neuromuscular blockade.
  • Anticoagulants:  Tell  the  surgeon.  Avoid  epidural,  spinal,  and  regional  blocks. 
Aspirin should probably be continued unless there is a major risk of bleeding. Dis-
cuss stopping clopidogrel therapy with the cardiologists/neurologists. See p590.
  • Anticonvulsants: Give as usual pre-op. Post-op, give drugs IV (or by NGT) until able 
to take orally. Valproate: give usual dose IV. Phenytoin: give IV slowly (<50mg/min, 
on cardiac monitor). IM phenytoin absorption is unreliable.

  • -blockers: Continue up to and including the day of surgery as this precludes a 

labile cardiovascular response.

  • Contraceptive pill: See BNF. Stop 4wks before major/leg surgery; ensure alterna-
tive contraception is used. Restart 2wks after surgery, provided patient is mobile.
  • Digoxin: Continue up to and including morning of surgery. Check for toxicity (ECG; 
plasma level); do plasma K+ and Ca2+ (suxamethonium can K+ and lead to ventricu-
lar arrhythmias in the fully digitalized).

  • Diuretics: Beware hypokalaemia, dehydration. Do U&E (and bicarbonate).
  • Eye-dr  ops: -blockers get systemically absorbed.
  • HRT: As with contraceptive pill there may be an increased risk of DVT/PE.
  • Levodopa: Possible arrhythmias when patient under GA.
  • Lithium: Get expert help; may potentiate neuromuscular blockade and cause ar-

rhythmias. See OHCS p349.

  • MAOIS: Get expert help as interactions may cause hypotensive/hypertensive crises.
  • Thyroid medication: see p600.
  • Tricyclics: These enhance adrenaline (epinephrine) and arrhythmias.
Preparation Starve patient; NBM ≥2h pre-op for clear ﬂ uids and ≥6h for solids.1
  • Is any bowel or skin preparation needed, or prophylactic antibiotics (p570)?
  • Start DVT prophylaxis as indicated, eg graduated compression stockings (CI in pe-
ripheral arterial disease); LMWH (p350): eg moderate risk, 20mg ~2h pre-op then 
20mg/24h; high risk (eg orthopaedic surgery), 40mg 12h pre-op then 40mg/24h; 
or heparin 5000U SC 2h pre-op, then every 8–12h SC for 7d  or until ambulant.

  • Ensure  necessary  premedications  (p572),  regular  medications,  analgesia,  anti-

emetics, antibiotics are all prescribed as appropriate. Conﬁ rm NBM.

  • Book any pre-, intra-, or post-operative x-rays or frozen sections.
  • Book post-operative physiotherapy.
  • If needed, site IV cannula, catheterize (p762), and/or insert a Ryle’s tube (p759).
  • Meta-analyses have shown no beneﬁ t to patients from mechanical bowel cleansing 
before colonic surgery—this is no longer considered good practice. There is also no 
evidence for the use of enemas prior to rectal surgery.

_OHCM_10e.indb   566

_OHCM_10e.indb   566

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

567

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Pre-operative history, examination, and tests
It  is  the  anaesthetist’s  responsibility  to  assess  suitability  for  anaesthesia.  The 
ward doctor assists with a good history and examination, should anticipate nec-
essary  tests,  and  can  also  reassure  and  inform  the  patient.  The  surgical  team 
should consent the patient.
The World Health Organization ‘Surgical Safety Checklist’ should be completed 
for every patient undergoing a surgical procedure, ensuring pre-operative prepa-
ration, intra-operative monitoring, and post-operative review.
History Assess past history of: MI1, diabetes, asthma, hypertension, rheumatic fe-
ver, epilepsy, jaundice. Existing illnesses, drugs, and allergies? Be alert to chronic 
lung disease, BP, arrhy thmias, and murmurs. Assess any speciﬁ c risks, eg is the 
patient pregnant? Is the neck/jaw immobile and teeth stable (intubation risk)? Has 
there been previous anaesthesia? Were there any complications (eg nausea, DVT)?
Examination  Assess  cardiorespiratory  system,  exercise  tolerance.  Is  the  neck 
unstable (eg arthritis complicating intubation)? Is  DVT/PE prophy laxis needed 
(p578)? For ‘unilateral’ surgery, mark the correct arm/leg/kidney (surgeon).
Tests Be guided by the history and examination and local/NICE protocols.
  • U&E, FBC, and ﬁ nger-prick blood glucose in most patients. If Hb <100g/L tell 
anaesthetist. Investigate/treat as appropriate. U&E are particularly important if 
the patient is starved, diabetic, on diuretics, a burns patient, has hepatic or renal 
disease, has an ileus, or is parenterally fed.

  • Crossmatch:  Blood  type  is  identiﬁ ed  and  units  are  allocated  to  the  patient. 
Group  and  save  (G&S): Blood type is identiﬁ ed and held, pending crossmatch 
(if required). Contact your lab to discuss requirements—this decreases wastage 
and allows increased effi  ciency of blood stocks.

  • Speciﬁ c blood tests: LFT in jaundice, malignancy, or alcohol abuse. Amylase in 
acute abdominal pain. Blood glucose if diabetic (p588). Drug levels as appropri-
ate  (eg  digoxin,  lithium).  Clotting  studies  in  liver  or  renal  disease,  DIC  (p352), 
massive blood loss, or if on valproate, warfarin, or heparin. HIV, HBsAg in high-risk 
patients, after counselling. Sickle test in those from Africa, West Indies, or Medi-
terranean—and if origins are in malarial areas (including most of India). Thyroid 
function tests in those with thyroid disease.

  • CXR if known cardiorespiratory disease, pathology, or symptoms or >65yrs old. 

Remember to check the ﬁ lm prior to surgery.

  • ECG if >55yrs old or poor exercise tolerance, or history of myocardial ischaemia, 

hypertension, rheumatic fever, or other heart disease.

  • Echocardiogram may be performed if there is a suspicion of poor LV function.
  • Pulmonary function tests in known pulmonary disease/obesity.
  • Lateral cervical spine X-ray (ﬂ exion and extension views) if history of rheumatoid 
arthritis/ankylosing spondylitis/Down’s syndrome, to warn of diffi  cult intubations.
  • MRSA screen: Screen and decolonize nasal carriers according to local policy (eg 
nasal  mupirocin  ointment).  Colonization  is  not  a  cont ra indication  to  surgery. 
Place patients last on the list to minimize transmission to others and cover with 
appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis, eg vancomycin or teicoplanin. Consider and 
document major blood-borne virus risk (HIV/HBV/HCV) according to local policies.

Normally healthy patient.

American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classiﬁ cation
Class I 
Class II  Mild systemic disease.
Class III  Severe systemic disease that limits activity but is not incapacitating.
Incapacitating systemic disease which poses a constant threat to life.
Class IV 
Class V  Moribund: not expected to survive 24h even with operation.
You will see a space for an ASA number on most anaesthetic charts. It is a health. 
index at the time of surgery. The suffi  x E is used in emergencies, eg ASA 2E.

1  If within the last 6 months, the perioperative risk of re-infarction (up to 40%) makes most elective surgery 
too risky. ECHO, and stress testing (+ exercise ECG or MUGA scan, p741) should be done.

_OHCM_10e.indb   567

_OHCM_10e.indb   567

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

568

Consent

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

In which of the following situations would you seek ‘informed written consent’ 
from  a  patient?  1  Feeling  for  a  pulse.  2  Taking  blood.  3  Inserting  a  central  line. 
4 Removing a section of small bowel during a laparotomy for division of adhesions. 
5 Orchidectomy after a failed operation for testicular torsion.
English law states that any intervention or treatment needs consent—ie all of the 
above—yet, for diff erent reasons. In fact, written consent itself is not required by 
law, but it does constitute ‘good medical practice’ in the best interests of the patient 
and practitioner. Sometimes actions and words can imply valid consent, eg by simply 
entering into conversation or holding out an arm. If the consequences are not clear 
and the patient has capacity to give consent, you should seek informed written 
consent as a record of your conversation.
For consent to be valid
  • It can be given any time before the intervention/treatment is initiated. Earlier is 
better as this will give the patient time to think about the risks, beneﬁ ts, and al-
ternatives—he or she may even bring forward questions on issues that you had 
not considered relevant. Think of consent as an ongoing process throughout the 
patient’s time with you, not just the moment of signing the form.

  • The proposed treatment or test must be clearly understood by the patient, taking 
into account the beneﬁ ts, risks (including complication rates if known), additional 
procedures, alternative courses of action, and their consequences.

  • It must be given voluntarily. This can be diffi  cult to evaluate—eg when live organ 
donation is being considered—see BOX ‘Special circumstances for consent’ for other 
diffi  cult situations.

  • The doctor providing treatment or undertaking the test needs to ensure that the 
patient has given valid consent. The act of seeking consent is ultimately the respon-
sibility of the doctor looking after the patient, though the task may be delegated 
to another health professional, as long as they are suitably trained and qualiﬁ ed.
Capacity relates to the ability to 1 understand, 2 retain, and 3 weigh up relevant 
information and 4 communicate the decision. Capacity is not a ﬁ xed state, but is 
speciﬁ c to any given time and decision—a person may lack capacity to be involved 
in a particular complex decision but retain capacity to decide other aspects of their 
care, or recover capacity as they recover from acute illness. Therefore, do not label 
anyone as unable to make a decision unless you have taken all practicable steps to 
help them to do so without success—non-urgent decisions should always be deferred 
if there is a chance to recover capacity. When acting on behalf of a person who lacks 
capacity, do so in their best interests and involve family members or an appointed 
surrogate where clinical urgency allows.
When taking consent
  • Does the patient currently have capacity for the decision in question?
  • Are you the right person to be obtaining consent?2
  • Use words the patient understands and avoid jargon and abbreviations.
  • Ensure that they believe your facts and can retain ‘pros’ and ‘cons’ long enough to 

inform their decision. Fact sheets/diagrams for individual operations help.

  • Make sure their choice is free from pressure from others, and explain that they can 
withdraw consent at any time after the form is signed. Some patients may view the 
consent form as a contract from which they cannot renege.

  • If the patient is illiterate, a witnessed mark does endorse valid consent. Similarly, 
if the patient is willing but physically unable to sign the consent form, then a wit-
nessed entry into the medical notes stating so is valid.

  • Remember to discuss further procedures that may become necessary during the 
proposed treatment. This avoids waking up to a nasty surprise (eg a missing testi-
cle as in scenario 5 earlier in this topic).

_OHCM_10e.indb   568

_OHCM_10e.indb   568

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Special circumstances for consent
Consent is complex, but remember that it exists for the beneﬁ t of the patient 
and the doctor, giving you an opportunity to revisit expectations and involve the 
patient in their own care. There are some areas of treatment or investigation for 
which it may be  advisable to seek specialist advice if it is not part of your regular 
practice2:
  • Photography of a patient.
  • Innovative or novel treatment.
  • Living organ donation.
  • Storage, use, or removal of human tissue (for any length of time).
  • The storage, loss, or use of gametes.
  • The use of patient records or tissue in research or teaching.
  • In the presence of an advanced directive or living will, expressly refusing a par-

ticular treatment, investigation, or action.

  • Consent if <16yrs (consent form 3 in NHS).  In the UK, those >16yrs can give valid 
consent.  Those  <16yrs  can  give  consent  for  a  medical  decision  provided  they 
understand what it involves—the concept of Gillick competence. It is still good 
practice to involve the parents in the decision, if the child is willing. If <18yrs 
and refusing life-saving surgery, talk to the parents and your senior; the law is 
unclear. You may need to contact the duty judge in the High Court.

  • Consent in the incapacitated (NHS consent form 4). No one (parents, relat ives, or 
even members of a healthcare team) is able to give consent on behalf of an adult 
in England, and the High Court may be required to give a ruling on the matters 
of lawfulness of a proposed procedure. Proceeding in a patient’s best interest is 
decided by the clinician overseeing their care, with involvement of family mem-
bers or a nominated advocate.

569

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

The right to refuse treatment
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do and die.  Alfred, Lord Tennyson from The Charge of the Light Brigade, 1854.
The rights of a patient are something of an antithesis to this military macabre of 
Tennyson, and it is our responsibility to respect the legal and ethical rights of those 
we treat. We do this not only for the sake of the individual, but also for the sake 
of an enduring trust between the patient and doctor, remembering that it is the 
patient’s right to refuse treatment (if a fully competent adult) even when this may 
result in the death of the patient, or even the death of an unborn child, whatever 
the stage of pregnancy. The only exceptions apply to treatment of mental health 
disorders (see eg in England and Wales the Mental Health Act 2007).

2  If in any doubt, turn to: your senior/consultant; your employing organization; your legal defence organiza-
tion; your national medical association; your local research ethics committee.

_OHCM_10e.indb   569

_OHCM_10e.indb   569

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

570

Prophylactic antibiotics in surgery

Prophylactic antibiotics are given to counter the risk of wound infection (see table 
13.1), which occurs in ~20% of elective GI surgery (up to 60% in emergency surgery). 
Antibiotics are also given if infection elsewhere, although unlikely, would have severe 
consequences (eg when prostheses are involved). A single dose given before surgery 
has been shown to be just as good as more prolonged regimens in biliary and colo-
rectal surgery. Additional doses may be given if high-risk/prolonged procedures, or 
if major blood loss. Wound infections are not necessarily trivial since sepsis may 
lead to haemorrhage, wound dehiscence, and initiate a fatal chain of events, so take 
measures to minimize the risk of wound infection:
  • Time administration correctly (eg IV prophylaxis should be given 30min prior to 

surgery to maximize skin concentration; metronidazole PR is given 2h before).

  • Use antibiotics which will kill anaerobes and coliforms.
  • Consider use of peri-operative supplemental oxygen. This is a practical method 

of reducing the incidence of surgical wound infections.

  • Practise strictly sterile surgical technique. (Ask for a hand with scrubbing up if 

you are not sure—theatre staff  will be more than pleased to help!)

Antibiotic regimens Adhere to local guidelines. BNF examples include:
  • Appendicectomy;  colorectal  resections  and  open  biliary  surgery:  A  single 
dose of IV piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5g/8h or gentamicin 1.5mg/kg + metronidazole 
500mg or co-amoxiclav 1.2g alone.

  • Oesophageal  or  gastric  surgery:  1  dose  of  IV  gentamicin  or  piperacillin/tazo-

bactam or co-amoxiclav (doses as for appendicectomy).

  • Vascular  surgery:  1  dose  of  IV  piperacillin/tazobactam  or  ﬂ ucloxacillin  1–2g  + 
gentamicin. Add metronidazole if risk of anaerobes (eg amputations, gangrene, 
or diabetes).

  • MRSA:  For  high-risk  patients  add  teicoplanin  or  vancomycin  to  the  above-listed 

regimens.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Table 13.1  Classiﬁ cation of surgical procedures and wound infection risk
Category
Clean
Clean-contaminated
Contaminated
Dirty

Description
Incising uninfected skin without opening a viscus
Intra-operative breach of a viscus (but not colon)
Breach of a viscus + spillage or opening of colon
The site is already contaminated with pus or 
faeces, or from exogenous contagion, eg trauma
Data from MRCS Core Modules: Essential Revision Notes, S. Andrews, Pastest.

Infection risk
<2%
8–10%
12–20%
25%

_OHCM_10e.indb   570

_OHCM_10e.indb   570

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Sutures

Sutures  are  central  to  the  art  of  surgery.  No  single  suture  ﬁ ts  the  bill  for  every 
occasion, and so suture selection (including size) depends on the job in hand (see 
tables 13.2, 13.3). In their broadest sense they are absorbable or non-absorbable, 
synthetic or natural, and their structure may be divided into monoﬁ lament, twisted, 
or braided. Monoﬁ lament sutures are quite slippery but minimize infection and pro-
duce less reaction. Braided sutures have plaited strands and provide secure knots, 
but they may allow infection to occur in surrounding tissue between their strands. 
Twisted sutures have 2 twisted strands and similar qualities to braided sutures. Sizes 
are denoted according to a scale running down from #5 (heavy braided suture). Most 
common modern sutures are smaller than size #0, hence rising numbers with a -0 
suffi  x correspond to progressively ﬁ ner grades of suture up to 11–0 (ﬁ ne ophthalmic 
monoﬁ laments). 3–0 or 4–0 are the best sizes for skin closure. Timing of suture re-
moval depends on site and the general health of the patient. Face and neck sutures 
may be removed after 5d (earlier in children), scalp and back of neck after 5d, ab-
dominal incisions and proximal limbs (including clips) after ~10d, distal extremities 
after 14d. In patients with poor wound healing, eg steroids, malignancy, infection, 
cachexia (p35), the elderly, or smokers, sutures may need ~14d.

571

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Some commonly encountered suture materials
Absorbable
Table 13.2  Absorbable suture materials
Construction
Material
Name
Monocryl® Poliglecaprone  Monoﬁ lament
Polydioxanone Monoﬁ lament
PDS®
Polyglactin 
Vicryl®

Braided multiﬁ lament Tying pedicles; bowel 

Use
Subcuticular skin closure
Closing abdominal wall

anasto mosis; subcutaneous 
closure

Polyglycolic acid Braided multiﬁ lament Very similar to Vicryl®

Dexon®
Non-absorbable
Table 13.3  Non-absorbable suture materials
Name
Ethilon®
Prolene®
Mersilk®N Silk
Metal

Construction
Material
Polyamide
Monoﬁ lament
Polypropylene Monoﬁ lament

Eg steel

Use
Closing skin wounds
Arterial anastomosis

Braided multiﬁ lament Securing drains
Clips or monoﬁ lament Skin wound/sternotomy closure

N = natural; other natural materials (eg cotton and catgut) are rarely used these days.

Surgical drains in the post-operative period 
The decision when to insert and remove drains may seem to be one of the great 
surgical enigmas—but there are basically three types to get a grip of:

1      To drain the area of surgery and are often put under suction or Ωve pressure 
(Redivac® uses a ‘high vacuum’). These are removed when they stop draining. 
They protect against collection, haematoma, and seroma formation (in breast 
surgery this can cause overlying skin necrosis).

2      To protect sites where leakage may occur in post-operative period, eg bowel 

anastomoses. These form a tract and are removed after about 1wk.

3      To collect red blood cells from the site of the operation, which can then be 
autotransfused within 6h, protecting from the hazards of allotransfusion—it 
is used commonly in orthopaedics. (eg Bellovac®).

‘Shortening a drain’ means withdrawing it (eg by 2cm/d) to allow the tract to 
seal, bit by bit. Check the surgeon’s wishes before altering a drain. If a drain 
‘falls out’ on the ward, avoid re-siting it because it is now covered in skin ﬂ ora. 
Put a collecting bag over the wound and contact surgical registrar. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   571

_OHCM_10e.indb   571

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

572

Anaesthesia

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Before anaesthesia, explain to the patient what will happen and where they will 
wake up, otherwise the recovery room or ITU will be frightening. Explain that they 
may feel ill on waking. The premedication aims to allay anxiety and to make the 
anaesthesia itself easier to conduct (see BOX). Typical regimens might include:
  • Anxiolytics: Benzodiazepines, eg lorazepam 2mg PO; temazepam 10–20mg PO. In 
children, use oral premeds as ﬁ rst choice, eg midazolam 0.5mg/kg (tastes bitter so 
often put in paracetamol suspension). Give oral premedication 2h before surgery 
(1h if IM route used).

  • Analgesics: See p574. Pre-emptive analgesia is not often used and eff ects are hard 
to determine. The aim is to dampen pain signals before they arrive. In children or 
anxious adults, local anaesthetic cream may be used on a few sites before inserting 
an IVI (the anaesthetist may prefer to site the cannula themselves!).

  • Anti-emetics:  Post-operative  nausea  and  vomiting  is  experienced  by  ~25%  of 
all patients. 5HT3 antagonists (eg ondansetron 4mg IV/IM) are the most eff ective 
agents; others, eg metoclopramide 10mg/8h IV/IM/PO, are also used—see p251.

  • Antacids: Ranitidine 50mg IV or omeprazole 40mg PO/IV if aspiration risk.
  • Antisialogues:  Glycopyrronium  (200–400mcg  in  adults,  4–8mcg/kg  in  children; 
given IV/IM 30–60min before induction) is sometimes used to decrease secretions 
that may cause respiratory obstruction in smaller airways.

  • Antibiotics: See p570.
Side-eff  ects of anaesthetic agents
  • Hyoscine, atropine: Anticholinergic,  tachycardia, urinary retention, glaucoma, 

sedation (especially in the elderly).

  • Opioids: Respiratory depression, cough reﬂ ex, nausea and vomiting, constipation.
  • Thiopental: (Induction agent.) Laryngospasm.
  • Propofol: (Induction agent.) Respiratory/cardiac depression, pain on injection.
  • Volatile agents, eg isoﬂ urane: Nausea and vomiting, cardiac depression, respira-

tory depression, vasodilation, hepatotoxicity (see BNF).
The complications of anaesthesia are due to loss of:
  • Pain sensation: Urinary retention, pressure necrosis, local nerve injuries (eg radial 

nerve palsy from arm hanging over the table edge).

  • Consciousness: Cannot communicate ‘wrong leg/kidney’. NB: in some patients (eg 
0.15%) retained consciousness is the problem. Awareness under GA sounds like a 
contradiction of terms, but remember that anaesthesia is a process rather than an 
event. Such awareness can lead to ill-deﬁ ned, delayed neuroses and post-traumatic 
stress disorder (OHCS p353).

  • Muscle power: Corneal abrasion ( tape the eyes closed), no respiration, no cough 
(leads to pneumonia and atelectasis—partial lung collapse causing shunting ± im-
paired gas exchange: it starts minutes after induction, and may be related to the 
use of 100% O2, supine position, surgery, age, and to loss of power).

Local/regional anaesthesia If unﬁ t/unwilling to undergo general anaesthesia, lo-
cal nerve blocks (eg brachial plexus) or spinal blocks (contraindication: anticoagula-
tion, local infection) using long-acting local anaesthetics such as bupivacaine may be 
indicated. See table 13.4 for doses and toxicity eff ects.
Drugs complicating anaesthesia Inform anaesthetist. See p566 for lists of spe-
ciﬁ c drugs, and actions to take.
Malignant hyperpyrexia This is a rare complication, precipitated by any volatile 
agent, eg halothane, or suxamethonium. It exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance. 
There is a rapid rise in temperature (>1°C every 30min); masseter spasm may be an 
early sign. Complications include hypoxaemia, hypercarbia, hyperkalaemia, meta-
bolic acidosis, and arrhythmias. Get expert help immediately. Prompt treatment 
with dantrolene3 (skeletal muscle relaxant), active cooling and ITU care can reduce 
mortality signiﬁ cantly. 

3  Give 1mg/kg every 5min IV—up to 10mg/kg in total (OHCS p628).

_OHCM_10e.indb   572

_OHCM_10e.indb   572

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Principles and practical conduct of anaesthesia

573

Hypnosis

Analgesia

Muscle relaxation

Fig 13.4  Principles of anaesthesia.
The conduct of anaesthesia (ﬁ g 13.4) typically involves:
  • Induction: Either intravenous (eg propofol 1.5–2.5mg/kg IV at a rate of 20–40mg 
every 10s; thiopental is an alternative) or, if airway obstruction or diffi  cult IV ac-
cess, gaseous (eg sevoﬂ urane or nitrous oxide, mixed in O2).

  • Airway control: Either using a facemask, an oropharyngeal (Guedel) airway or 
by intubation. The latter usually requires muscle relaxation with a depolarizing/
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker (OHCS p622).

  • Maintenance of anaesthesia: Either a volatile agent added to N2O/O2 mixture, 
or high-dose opiates with mechanical ventilation, or IV infusion anaesthesia (eg 
propofol 4–12mg/kg/h IVI).

  • Recovery: Change inspired gases to 100% oxygen only, then discontinue any an-
aesthetic infusions and reverse muscle paralysis. Extubate once spontaneously 
breathing, place patient in recovery position, and give oxygen by facemask.

  • For further details, see the Anaesthesia chapter in OHCS (p612).

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

  Local anaesthetic toxicity and maximum doses
Anaesthetists are masters of the drug dose by weight! It is important to remem-
ber the maximum doses for local anaesthetics, not least because we use them so 
frequently, but because the eff ects of overdose can be lethal.

% concn

Handy to remember (though it can be worked out with a pen, paper, and  SI 
units) is that a 1% concentration is equivalent to 10mg/mL. Local anaesthetics are 
also basic, and so do not work well in acidic environments, eg abscesses.
Table 13.4  Example of maximum doses for local anaesthetic
Approx.  allowable 
volume (mL/kg)
1.12
0.56
0.28
0.14

0.25%
0.5%
1%
2%
Local anaesthetic toxicity starts with peri-oral tingling and paraesthesiae, pro-
gressing to drowsiness, seizures, coma, and cardiorespiratory arrest. If suspected 
(the patient feels ‘funny’ and develops early signs) then stop administration im-
mediately and commence ABC resuscitation as required. Treatment is with lipid 
emulsion. Find out where this is stored in your hospital.

Approx.  allowable  volume 
for 70kg adult (mL)
≤80
≤40
≤20
≤10

Lidocaine concn 
(mg/mL)
2.5
5
10
20

_OHCM_10e.indb   573

_OHCM_10e.indb   573

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
574

The control of pain

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Humans are the most exquisite devices ever made for experiencing pain: the rich er 
our inner lives, the greater the varieties of pain there are for us to feel, and the more 
resources we have for dealing with pain. If we can connect with patients’ in ner lives 
we may make a real diff erence. Never forget how painful pain is, nor how fear mag-
niﬁ es pain. Try not to let these sensations, so often interposed between your patient 
and recovery, be invisible to you as he or she bravely puts up with them.
Approach to management (ﬁ g 13.5 and p532.) Review and chart each pain carefully 
and individually.
  • Identify and treat the underlying pathology wherever possible.
  • Give regular doses rather than on an ‘as-required’ basis.
  • Choose the best route: PO, PR, IM, epidural, SC, inhalation, or IV.
  • Explanation and reassurance contribute greatly to analgesia.
  • Allow the patient to be in charge. This promotes wellbeing, and does not lead to 
overuse. Patient-controlled continuous IV morphine delivery systems are useful.

  • Liaise with the Acute Pain Service, if possible.
Non-narcotic (simple) analgesia Paracetamol 0.5–1.0g/4h PO (up to 4g daily; 15mg/
kg/4h  IV over 15min in children <50kg; up to 60mg/kg/d). Caution in liver impair-
ment. NSAIDS, eg ibuprofen 400mg/8h PO (see BNFC for dosing in children) are good 
for musculoskeletal pain and renal or biliary colic. CI: peptic ulcer, clotting disorders, 
anticoagulants. Cautions: asthma, renal or hepatic impairment, heart failure,  IHD, 
pregnancy, and the elderly. Aspirin is contraindicated in children due to the risk of 
Reye’s syndrome (OHCS p652).
Opioid drugs for severe pain Morphine (eg 10–15mg/2–4h IV/IM) or diamor phine 
(5–10mg/2–4h PO, SC, or slow IV, but you may need much more) are best. NB: these 
are ‘controlled’ drugs. For palliative care, see p532. Alternative delivery routes in-
clude  transdermal  (once  baseline  requirements  are  established)  or  sublingual. 
Side-effects of opioids: These include nausea (so give with an anti-emetic, p251), 
respiratory depression, constipation, cough suppression, urinary retention, BP, and 
sedation (do not use in hepatic failure or head injury). Dependency is rarely a prob-
lem. Naloxone (eg 100–200mcg IV, followed by 100mcg increments, eg every 2min 
until responsive) may be needed to reverse the eff ects of excess opioids (p842).
Epidural analgesia Opioids and anaesthetics are given into the epidural space by 
infusion or as boluses. Ask the advice of the Pain Service. SES are thought to be less, 
as the drug is more localized: watch for respiratory depression and local anaesthetic-
induced autonomic blockade (BP).
Adjuvant treatments Eg radiotherapy for bone cancer pain; anticonvulsants, an-
tidepressants, gabapentin or steroids for neuropathic pain, antispasmodics, eg hy-
oscine butylbromide4 (Buscopan® 10–20mg/8h PO/IM/IV) for intestinal or renal tract 
colic. If brief pain relief is needed (eg for changing dressings or exploring wounds), 
try inhaled nitrous oxide (with 50% O2—as Entonox®) with an ‘on-demand’ valve. 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), local heat, local or regional an-
aesthesia, and neurosurgical procedures (eg excision of neuroma) may be tried but 
can  prove  disappointing.  Treat  conditions  that  exacerbate  pain  (eg  constipation, 
depression, anxiety).

4  Not to be confused with hyoscine hydrobromide; used for drying secretions and in motion sickness.

_OHCM_10e.indb   574

_OHCM_10e.indb   574

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

WHO’s Pain relief ladder

 Freedom
from pain
Opioid for moderate
to severe pain,
+/– non-opioid
+/– adjuvant

3

pain persisting or increasing

2

Opioid for mild to moderate pain,
+/– non-opioid
+/– adjuvant

pain persisting or increasing

1

Non-opioid,
+/– adjuvant

Fig 13.5  World Health Organization pain ladder.

575

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   575

_OHCM_10e.indb   575

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

576

General post-operative complications

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

• infection (see earlier)
• alcohol withdrawal (p280)
• liver/renal failure.

Pyrexia Mild pyrexia in the 1st 48h is often from  atelectasis (needs prompt physio, 
not antibiotics), tissue damage/necrosis, or even from blood trans fusions, but still have 
a low threshold for infection screen. Consider evidence for peritonism, chest, urinary, 
wound, or cannula site infections, as well as possible endocarditis, meningism, or DVT 
(also causes °T). Send blood for FBC, U&E, CRP, and cultures (±LFT). Dipstick the urine. 
Consider MSU, CXR, and abdominal ultrasound/CT depending on clinical ﬁ ndings.
Confusion may manifest as agitation, disorientation, and attempts to leave hospital, 
especially at night. Gently reassure the patient in well-lit surroundings. See p484 for 
a full work-up. Common causes are:
  • hypoxia (pneumonia, atelectasis, LVF, PE) 
  • drugs (opiates, sedatives, and many others) 
  • urinary retention 
  • MI or stroke
Occasionally, sedation is necessary to examine the patient; consider lorazepam 1mg 
PO/IM (antidote: ﬂ umazenil) or haloperidol 0.5–2mg IM. Reassure relatives that post-
op confusion is common (seen in up to 40%) and reversible.
Dyspnoea or hypoxia Any previous lung disease? Sit patient up and give O2,  monitor 
peripheral O2 sats by pulse oximetry (p162). Examine for evidence of: •pneum onia, 
pulmonary  collapse,  or  aspiration  •LVF  (MI;  ﬂ uid  overload)  •pulmonary  embolism 
(p190) •pneumothorax (p190; due to CVP line, intercostal block, or mechanical ventila-
tion). Tests: FBC; ABG; CXR; ECG. Manage according to ﬁ ndings.
BP If severe, tilt bed head-down and give O2. Check pulse and BP yourself; compare 
it with pre-op values. Post-op BP is often from hypovolaemia resulting from inad-
equate  ﬂ uid  input,  so  check  ﬂ uid  chart  and  replace  losses.  Monitor  urine  output 
(may need catheterization). A CVP line can help monitor ﬂ uid resuscitation (normal 
is 0–5cmH2O relative to sternal angle). Hypovolaemia may also be caused by haem-
orrhage so review wounds, drains, and abdomen. If unstable, return to theatre for 
haemostasis. Beware cardiogenic and neurogenic causes and look for evidence of MI 
or PE. Consider sepsis and anaphylaxis. Management: p790.
BP may be from pain, urinary retention, idiopathic hypertension (eg missed medi-
cation), or inotropic drugs. Oral cardiac medications (including antihypertensives) 
should  be  continued  throughout  the  perioperative  period  even  if  NBM.  Treat  the 
cause, consider increasing the regular medication, or if not absorbing orally try 50mg 
labetalol IV over 1min (see p140).
Urine output (oliguria) Aim for output of >30mL/h in adults (or >0.5mL/kg/h). 
Anuria may reﬂ ect a blocked or malsited catheter (see p763) rather than AKI. Flush 
or replace catheter. Oliguria is usually due to too little replacement of lost ﬂ uid. Treat 
by increasing ﬂ uid input. Acute kidney injury may follow shock, drugs, transfusion, 
pancreatitis, or trauma (see p300 for classiﬁ cation and management of AKI).
  • Review ﬂ uid chart and examine for signs of volume depletion.
  • Urinary retention is also common, so examine for a palpable bladder.
  • Establish normovolaemia (a CVP line may help); you may need 1L/h IVI for 2–3h. A 

‘ﬂ uid challenge’ of 250–500mL over 30min may also help.

  • Catheterize bladder (for accurate monitoring)—see p762; check U&E.
  • If intrinsic renal failure is suspected, stop nephrotoxic drugs (eg NSAIDS, ACE-i) and 

refer to a nephrologist early.

Nausea/vomiting Any mechanical obstruction, ileus, or emetic drugs (opiates, dig -
oxin,  anaesthetics)?  Consider  AXR, NGT, and  an  anti-emetic (not  metoclopramide 
because of its prokinetic property). See p251 for choice of anti-emetics.
Na+  Pre-op  level?  Excess  IV  ﬂ uids  may  exacerbate  the  situation.  Correct  slowly 
(p672). SIADH (p673) can be precipitated by pain, nausea, opioids, and chest infection. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   576

_OHCM_10e.indb   576

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Post-operative bleeding
Primary haemorrhage: Continuous bleeding, starting during surgery. Replace 
blood loss. If severe, return to theatre for adequate haemostasis. Treat shock 
vigorously (p790–804).
Reactive haemorrhage: Haemostasis appears secure until BP rises and bleeding 
starts. Replace blood and re-explore wound.
Secondary haemorrhage (caused by infection) occurs 1–2wks post-op.

Talking about post-op complications…
When asked to give your thoughts on the complications of an operation—maybe 
with an examiner or a patient—a good starting point is to divide them up accord-
ingly (and for each of the following stratify as immediate, early, and late):
  • From the anaesthetic: (p572.) Eg respiratory depression from induction agents.
  • From surgery in general: (p576.) Eg wound infection, haemorrhage, neurovas-

cular damage, DVT/PE.

  • From the speciﬁ c procedure: Eg saphenous nerve damage in stripping of the 

long varicose vein.

Tailor the discussion towards the individual who, eg if an arteriopath, may have a 
signiﬁ cant risk of cardiac ischaemia during hypotensive episodes while under the 
anaesthetic. For some other post-op complications, see:
• Pain (p574) • DVT (p578) • Pulmonary embolus (p190; massive, p818) • Wound de-
hiscence (p580) • Complications in post-gastric surgery (p622) • Other complica-
tions of speciﬁ c operations (p580).

577

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   577

_OHCM_10e.indb   577

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

578

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

DVTS occur in 25–50% of surgical patients, and many non-surgical patients. All hospi-
tal inpatients should be assessed for DVT/PE risk and off ered prophylaxis if appropri-
ate. 65% of below-knee DVTs are asymptomatic; these rarely embolize to the lung.
Risk factors Age, pregnancy, synthetic oestrogen, trauma, surgery (especially pel-
vic/orthopaedic), past DVT, cancer, obesity, immobility, thrombophilia (p374).
Signs •Calf warmth/tenderness/swelling/erythema. •Mild fever. •Pitting oedema.
 Cellulitis; ruptured Baker’s cyst. Both may coexist with a DVT.
Tests Calculate Wells score (see table 13.5) before ordering D-dimer. D-dimer is sen-
sitive but not speciﬁ c for DVT (also  in infection, pregnancy, malignancy, and post-op).
Wells score: ≤1 point = DVT unlikely: Perform D-dimer. If negative, DVT excluded. 
If positive, proceed to USS (if USS negative, DVT excluded; if positive, treat as DVT).
≥2 points = DVT likely: Do D-dimer and USS. If both negative, DVT excluded. If USS posi-
tive, treat as DVT. If D-dimer positive and USS negative, repeat USS in 1 week.
Do thrombophilia tests (p374) before commencing anticoagulant therapy if there 
are no predisposing factors, in recurrent DVT, or if DVT in unusual site. Look for un-
derlying malignancy: Urine dip; FBC, LFT, Ca2+; CXR ± CT abdomen/pelvis (and mam-
mography in ) if >40yrs.
Prevention •Stop the oral contraceptive pill 4wks pre-op. •Mobilize early. •LMWH eg 
enoxaparin 20mg/24h SC,  to 40mg for high-risk patients (p375) (caution if eGFR less 
than 30mL/min/1.73m2). •Graduated compression stockings (‘thromboembolic deter-
rent (TED) stockings’; CI: ischaemia) and intermittent pneumatic compression devices 
 risk of DVT by ~70% in surgical patients.•Fondaparinux (a factor Xa inhibitor)  risk 
of DVT over LMWH in eg major orthopaedic surgery without  risk of bleeding.
Treatment LMWH (eg enoxaparin 1.5mg/kg/24h SC) or fondaparinux. LMWH is superi-
or to unfractionated heparin (used in renal failure or if risk of bleeding; dose guided 
by APTT, p350). Cancer patients should receive LMWH for 6 months (then review). In 
others, start warfarin simultaneously with LMWH (warfarin is prothrombotic for the 
ﬁ rst 48h). Stop heparin when INR is 2–3; treat for 3 months in most (longer in some 
cases—see p351). Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACS p190), eg dabigatan, apixaban, 
rivoraxaban, are newer alternatives licensed for the treatment of DVT with beneﬁ ts 
relating to simpler dosing and monitoring and  bleeding risk. Inferior vena caval 
ﬁ lters may be used in active bleeding, or when anticoagulants fail, to minimize risk of 
PE. Post-phlebitic change (pain, swelling, and skin changes) can be seen in 10–30%—
graduated compression stockings may help.

Pretest clinical probability scoring for DVT: the Wells score
In patients with symptoms in both legs, the more symptomatic leg is used.
Table 13.5  Wells score

Clinical features
Active cancer (treatment within last 6 months or palliative)
Paralysis, paresis, or recent plaster immobilization of leg
Recently bedridden for >3d or majory surgery in last 12wks
Local tenderness along distribution of deep venous system
Entire leg swollen
Calf swelling >3cm compared with asymptomatic leg (measured 
10cm below tibial tuberosity)
Pitting oedema (greater in the symptomatic leg)
Collateral superﬁ cial veins (non-varicose)
Previously documented DVT
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT

Score
  1 point
  1 point
  1 point
  1 point
  1 point
  1 point

  1 point
  1 point
  1 point
Ω2 points

Reprinted from the Lancet, 350, Wells PS et al., 'Value of assessment of pretest probability of deep-vein 
thrombosis in clinical management', 1795–8, Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   578

_OHCM_10e.indb   578

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Swollen legs

Bilateral oedema implies systemic disease with venous pressure (eg right heart 
failure) or intravascular oncotic pressure (any cause of albumin, so test the urine 
for protein). It is dependent (distributed by gravity), which is why legs are aff ected 
early, but severe oedema extends above the legs. In the bed-bound, ﬂ uid moves to 
the new dependent area, causing a sacral pad. The exception is the local increase 
in venous pressure occurring in IVC obstruction: the swelling neither extends above 
the legs nor redistributes. Causes: •Right heart failure (p134). •Albumin (p686, eg 
renal or liver failure). •Venous insuffi  ciency: acute, eg prolonged sitting, or chronic, 
with  haemosiderin-pigmented,  itchy,  eczematous  skin  ±  ulcers.  •Vaso dilators,  eg 
nifedipine, amlodipine. •Pelvic mass (p57, p604). •Pregnancy—if BP + proteinuria, 
diagnose pre-eclampsia (OHCS p48): ﬁ nd an obstetrician urgently. In all the above, 
both legs need not be aff ected to the same extent.
Unilateral oedema Pain ± redness implies DVT or inﬂ ammation, eg cellulitis or in-
sect bites (any blisters?). Bone or muscle may be to blame, eg tumours; necrotizing 
fasciitis (p660); trauma (check for sensation, pulses, and severe pain esp. on pas-
sive movement: a compartment syndrome with ischaemic necrosis needs prompt 
fasciotomy). Impaired mobility suggests trauma, arthritis, or a Baker’s cyst (p694). 
Non-pitting oedema is oedema you cannot indent: see p35.
Nine questions to ask

579

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

1      Is it both legs?
4      Any trauma?
7      Any pain?

2      Is she pregnant?
5      Any pitting (p35)?
8      Any skin changes?

3      Is she mobile?
6      Past diseases/on drugs?
9      Any oedema elsewhere?
Tests Look for proteinuria (+hypoalbuminaemia ≈nephrotic syndrome). CCF?
Treatment of leg oedema Treat the cause. Diuretics for all is not an answer. Elevat-
ing legs for dependent oedema (ankles higher than hips—do not just use footstools); 
raise the foot of the bed. Graduated support stockings may help (CI: ischaemia).

Travel and DVT
Long-distance travel appears to be a risk factor for the development of venous 
thromboembolism (VTE). Data suggests this is not conﬁ ned to air travel, increases 
with the duration of travel, and results in clinical thrombosis more often in travel-
lers with pre-existing risk factors. Dehydration, immobilization, decreased oxygen 
tension, and prolonged sitting have all been suggested as contributory factors.
The risk of developing a DVT from a long-distance ﬂ ight has been estimated at 1 in 
10 000 to 1 in 40 000 for the general population.
  • The incidence of DVT in high-risk groups has been shown to be 4–6% for ﬂ ights 
>10h. Travellers with ≥1 risk factor should consider compression stockings. For 
high-risk individuals consider a single dose of prophylactic LMWH for ﬂ ights >6h.

  • There is risk of PE associated with long-distance air travel.
  • Compression stockings may  risk of DVT.
  • There is no evidence to support the use of prophylactic aspirin.
  • Risk reduction measures: leg exercises, increased water intake, and refraining 

from alcohol or caff eine during the journey.

_OHCM_10e.indb   579

_OHCM_10e.indb   579

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

580

Speciﬁ c post-operative complications

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Laparotomy Wound may break down from a few days to a few weeks post-op 
(incidence  ≈ 3.5%).  Particular  risk  in  the  elderly,  malnourished  (eg  cancer,  IBD),  if 
infection, uraemia, or haematoma is present, or in repeat laparotomies. Warning 
sign is a pink serous discharge. Always assume the defect involves the whole of the 
wound. Wound dehiscence may lead to a ‘burst abdomen’ with eviscer ation of bowel 
(mortality 15–30%). If you are on the ward when this happens, call your senior, put 
the viscera back into the abdomen, place a sterile dressing over the wound, and 
give IV antibiotics (eg piperacillin/tazobactam; see local guidelines). Allay anxiety, 
give parenteral pain control, set up an IVI, and return patient to theatre. Incisional 
hernia is a common late problem (20%), repairable by mesh insertion (if necessary).
Biliary surgery Early: Iatrogenic bile duct injury, cholangitis, bile leakage, bleeding 
into the biliary tree (haemobilia—may lead to melaena or haematemesis); pancreatitis. 
Retained stones may be removed by ERCP (p742); if this is not available a ‘T-tube’ left 
in the bile duct at the time of closure allows free drainage to the exterior; unrelieved 
distal obstruction of the bile duct may result in ﬁ stula formation and chronic leakage 
of bile. If jaundiced, maintain a good urine output, monitor coagulation, and consider 
antibiotics. Late: Bile duct stricture; post-cholecystectomy syndrome (symptoms aris-
ing from alterations in bile ﬂ ow due to loss of the reservoir function of the gallbladder).
Thyroid surgery Early: Recurrent (± superior) laryngeal nerve palsy (hoarseness) 
can occur permanently in 0 . 5% and transiently in 1 . 5%—warn the patient that their 
voice will be different for a few days post-op because of intubation and local oedema 
(NB: pre-operative ﬁ breoptic laryngoscopy should be performed to exclude pre-exist-
ing vocal cord dysfunction); thyroid storm (symptoms of severe hyper thyroidism—see 
p834); tracheal obstruction due to haematoma in the wound: relieve by immedi-
ate removal of stitches or clips using the cutter/remover that should remain at the 
beside; may require urgent surgery; hypoparathyroidism (p222); check plasma Ca2+ 
daily; transient drops in serum concentration are common, permanent in 2 . 5%. Late: 
Hypothyroidism; recurrent hyperthyroidism.
Mastectomy Arm lymphoedema in up to 20% of those undergoing axillary node 
sampling or dissection. The risk of lymphoedema increases with the level of axillary 
dissection: risk is lower with level 1 dissection (remains inferior to pec. minor) com-
pared to level 3 dissection (goes superior to pec. minor, rarely done); skin necrosis.
Arterial  surgery  Bleeding;  thrombosis;  embolism;  graft  infection;  MI;  AV  ﬁ stula 
formation. Complications of aortic surgery: Gut ischaemia; renal failure; respira-
tory distress; trauma to ureters or anterior spinal artery (leading to paraplegia); 
ischaemic events from distal emboli from dislodged thrombus; aorto-enteric ﬁ stula.
Colonic surgery Early: Sepsis; ileus; ﬁ stulae; anastomotic leak (11% for radical rectal 
surgery); haemorrhage; trauma to ureters or spleen. Late: Adhesional obstruction (BOX).
Small  bowel  surgery  Short  gut  syndrome  (best  deﬁ ned  functionally,  as  ma-
labsorption  due  to  insuffi  cient  residual  small  bowel;  adults  with  150cm  at  risk). 
Diarrhoea and malabsorption (particularly of fats) lead to a number of metabolic 
abnormalities including deﬁ ciency in vitamins A, D, E, K, and B12, hyper oxaluria (causing 
renal stones), and bile salt depletion (causing gallstones). The management of short 
bowel syndrome is complex, aiming to correct metabolic abnormalities, optimize 
residual bowel function, and support nutrition (using parenteral route if necessary).
Tracheostomy Mediastinitis; surgical emphysema. Later: stenosis.
Splenectomy (p373.) Acute gastric dilatation (a serious consequence of not using a 
NGT, or to check that the one in place is working); thrombocytosis; sepsis. Lifetime 
sepsis  risk  is  partly  preventable  with  pre-op  vaccines—ie  Haemophilus  type  B, 
meningococcal, and pneumococcal (p407 & p167) and prophylactic penicillin.
Genitourinary surgery Septicaemia (from instrumentation in the presence of in-
fected urine)—consider a stat dose of gentamicin; urinoma—rupture of a ureter or 
renal pelvis leading to a mass of extravasated urine.
Gastrectomy See p622. Prostatectomy p642. Haemorrhoidectomy p632. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   580

_OHCM_10e.indb   580

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Adhesions—legacy of the laparotomy, bane of the surgeon
When  re-operating  on  the  abdomen,  the  struggle  against  adhesions  tests  the 
farthest and darkest boundaries of patience of the abdominal surgeon and the 
assistant. The skill and persistence required to gently and atraumatically tease 
apart these ﬁ brous bands that restrict access and vision makes any progression, 
no matter how slight, cause for subdued celebration. Perseverance is the name 
of this game.

Surgical division of adhesions is known as adhesiolysis. Any surgical procedure 
that breaches the abdominal or pelvic cavities can predispose to the formation 
of adhesions, which are found in up to 90% of those with previous abdominal 
surgery; this is why we do not rush to operate on small bowel obstruction: the op-
eration predisposes to yet more adhesions. Handling of the serosal surface of the 
bowel causes inﬂ ammation, which over weeks to years can lead to the formation 
of ﬁ brous bands that tether the bowel to itself or adjacent structures—though 
adhesions can also form secondary to infection, radiation injury, and inﬂ ammatory 
processes such as Crohn’s disease. Their main sequelae are intestinal obstruction 
(the cause in ~60% of cases—see p610) and chronic abdominal or pelvic pain. Stud-
ies have shown that adhesiolysis may help relieve chronic pain, though for a small 
proportion of patients the pain never improves or even worsens after directed 
intervention.

As far as prevention is concerned, the best approach is to avoid operating; lapa-
roscopy compared with laparotomy reduces the rate of local adhesions. Insertion 
of synthetic ﬁ lms (eg hyaluronic acid/carboxymethyl membrane) to prevent adhe-
sions to the anterior abdominal wall reduces incidence, extent, and severity of 
adhesions, but not incidence of obstruction or operative re-intervention.

581

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   581

_OHCM_10e.indb   581

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

582

Stoma care

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

A stoma (Greek=mouth) is an artiﬁ cial union between a conduit and the outside 
world—eg a colostomy, in which faeces are made to pass through an opening in the 
abdominal wall when a loop of colon is brought out onto the skin. NB: a stoma can 
also be made between two internal conduits (eg a choledochojejunostomy).
Colostomies (Usually left illiac fossa and ﬂ ush with the skin—ﬁ g 13.8.) May be tem-
porary or permanent. Are they suitable for a laparoscopic operation?
  • Loop colostomy: A loop of colon is exteriorized and partially divided, forming two 
stomas that are joined together (the proximal end passes stool, the distal end passes 
mucus, see ﬁ g 13.6). A rod under the loop prevents retraction and may be removed 
after 7d. A loop colostomy is often temporary and performed to protect a distal 
anastomosis, eg after anterior resection.

  • End colostomy: The bowel is divided and the proximal end brought out as a stoma; 
the distal end may be: 1 resected, eg abdominoperineal (AP) resection (inspect the 
perineum for absent anus when examining a stoma) 2 closed and left in the abdo-
men (Hartmann’s procedure) 3 exteriorized, forming a ‘mucous ﬁ stula’.

  • Paul–Mikulicz colostomy: A double-barrelled colostomy in which the colon is di-
vided completely (eg to excise a section of bowel). Each end is exteriorized as two 
separate stomas.

Output: Colostomies ideally pass 1–2 formed motions/day into an adherent plastic 
pouch. Some may be managed with irrigation, thus avoiding a pouch.
Incidence: 21 000 stomas/yr in UK (>50% are permanent). Most manage their stomas 
well. The cost for appliances is ~£1500/yr. If there is a skin reaction to the adhesive 
or pouch, a change of device may be all that is needed. Contact the stoma nurse.
Ileostomies (Usually right illiac fossa.) Protrude from the skin and emit frequent 
ﬂ uid motions which contain active enzymes (so the skin needs protecting—see ﬁ g 
13.7). Loop ileostomies can be formed to defunction the colon as a temporary meas-
ure eg during control of diffi  cult perianal Crohn’s disease. End ileostomy follows total 
or subtotal  colectomy, eg for UC; subsequent formation of ileal pouch-anal anasto-
mosis (pouch of ileum is joined to the upper anal canal) can allow for stoma reversal.
Alternative (non-stoma forming) surgery Low/ultralow anterior resection: All 
or part of the rectum is excised and the proximal colon anastomosed to the top of the 
anal canal (the lower the level of anastomosis, the higher the risk of complication). 
Transanal endoscopic microsurgery: Allows excision of small tumours within the 
rectum with preservation of sphincter function.
Urostomies are fashioned after total cystectomy, bringing urine from the ureters 
to the abdominal wall via an ileal conduit that is usually incontinent. Formation of 
a catheterizable valvular mechanism may retain continence. Advances in urological 
surgery have seen an increase in continence-saving procedures such as orthotopic 
neobladder reconstruction, with good long-term continence rates.
When choosing a stoma site, avoid:
  • Bony prominences (eg anterior superior iliac spine, costal margins).
  • The umbilicus.
  • Old wounds/scars—there may be adhesions beneath.
  • Skin folds and creases.
  • The waistline.
  • The site should be assessed pre-operatively by the stoma nurse, with the patient 

both lying and standing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   582

_OHCM_10e.indb   582

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Complications of stomas
Liaise early with the stoma nurse, starting pre-operatively.
Early:
  • Haemorrhage at stoma site.
  • Stoma ischaemia—colour progresses from dusky grey to black.
  • High output (can lead to K+)—consider loperamide ± codeine to thicken output.
  • Obstruction secondary to adhesions (see p581).
  • Stoma retraction.
Delayed:
  • Obstruction (failure at operation to close lateral space around stoma).
  • Dermatitis around stoma site (worse with ileostomy).
  • Stoma prolapse.
  • Stomal intussusception.
  • Stenosis.
  • Parastomal hernia (risk increases with time). NB: prophylactic mesh insertion at 

the time of stoma formation reduces this risk.

  • Fistulae.
  • Psychological problems.

583

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Psychological aspects of stoma care
The physical and psychological aspects of stoma care must not be undervalued. Be 
alert to any vicious cycle in which a skin reaction leads to leakage and precipitates 
a fear of going out, or a fear of eating. This in turn may lead to poor nutrition and 
further skin reactions, resulting in further leakage and depression. These cycles 
can  be  circumvented  by  the  stoma  nurse,  who  is  the  expert  in  ﬁ tting  secure, 
odourless devices and providing patients with a wealth of physical and psycho-
logical support, both pre and post operative (explaining what is going to happen, 
what the stoma will be like, and troubleshooting post-op problems). Early refer-
ral prevents problems. Without input from the stoma nurse, a patient may reject 
their colostomy, never attend to it, and develop deep-seated psychological and 
psychiatric problems.

Fig 13.7  An ileostomy sits proud, has promi-
nent mucosal folds, and is often right-sided.

Fig  13.6  A  loop  colostomy 
with  double-barrelled  stoma 
and supporting ostomy rod.

Fig 13.8  A colostomy sits ﬂ ush with the skin 
and is typically sited in the left iliac fossa.

_OHCM_10e.indb   583

_OHCM_10e.indb   583

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

584

Nutritional support in hospital

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Over 25% of hospital inpatients may be malnourished. Hospitals can become so 
focused on curing disease that they ignore the foundations of good health—mal-
nourished  patients  recover  more  slowly  and  experience  more  complications.  See 
table 13.6.
Why are so many hospital patients malnourished?

1      Increased nutritional requirements (eg sepsis, burns, surgery).
2      Increased nutritional losses (eg malabsorption, output from stoma).
3      Decreased intake (eg dysphagia, nausea, sedation, coma).
4      Eff ect of treatment (eg nausea, diarrhoea).
5      Enforced starvation (eg prolonged periods nil by mouth).
6      Missing meals (eg due to investigations—minimize meal time disruption).
7      Diffi  culty with feeding (eg lost dentures; no one available to assist).
8      Unappetizing food.

Identifying at-risk patients Assess nutrition state (using eg Malnutrition Univer-
sal Screening Tool3) and weight on admission; reassess weekly thereafter. Involve 
dieticians early in those at risk.
  • History: Recent weight (>20%, accounting for ﬂ uid balance); recent reduced in-
take; diet change (eg recent change in consistency of food); nausea, vomiting, pain, 
diarrhoea which might have led to reduced intake.

  • Examination: State of hydration (p666): dehydration can go hand-in-hand with 
malnutrition, and overhydration can mask malnutrition. Evidence of malnutrition: 
skin hanging off  muscles (eg over biceps); no fat between fold of skin; hair rough 
and wiry; pressure sores; sores at corner of mouth. Calculate body mass index 
(p244);  BMI  <18.5kg/m2  suggests  malnour ishment.  Anthropomorphic  indices,  eg 
mid-arm circumference, skin fold measures, and grip strength are also used.

  • Investigations: Generally unhelpful. Low albumin suggestive, but is aff ected by 
many things other than nutrition. Albumin can be helpful in monitoring recovery.
Enteral nutrition (Ie nutrition given into gastrointestinal tract.) If at all possible, 
give nutrition by mouth. An all-ﬂ uid diet can meet requirements (but get advice from 
dietician). If danger of choking or aspiration (eg after stroke), consider semi-solid 
diet. Early post-op enteral nutrition has been shown to beneﬁ t patients (eg after GI 
surgery) and may reduce complications. Tube feeding: Liquid nutrition via a tube: 
Nasogastric typically placed without guidance (p759); nasojejunal tubes require en-
doscopic placement (used if gastric outlet obstruction, delayed gastric emptying, 
post-gastrectomy, or pancreatitis). Alternatively, gastric or jejunal tubes may be in-
serted radiologically or surgically (ie gastrostomy/jejunostomy). Use for nutritionally 
complete, commercially prepared feeds. Close liaison with a dietician is essential. 
Polymeric feeds consist of undigested proteins, starches, and long-chain fatty acids 
(eg Nutrison standard®, Osmolite®). Normally contain ~1kCal/mL and 4–6g protein 
per 100mL. Typical requirements met with 2L/24h. Elemental feeds consist of indi-
vidual amino acids, oligo- and monosaccharides needing minimal digestion. Feed is 
typically initiated at a slow, continuous rate (nausea and vomiting less problematic) 
but patients may build up to shorter, bolus feeds, freeing them from pumps between.
Guidelines for success
  • Use ﬁ ne-bore (9Fr) nasogastric feeding tube when possible.
  • Check position of nasogastric tube (pH testing)  before starting feeding (p759); the 

positioning of a nasojejunal tube can be checked on abdominal X-ray.

  • Build up feeds gradually to avoid diarrhoea and distension.
  • Weigh at least weekly.
  • Check blood glucose and plasma electrolytes (monitor for refeeding syndrome if 

previously malnourished—p587).

  • Treat underlying conditions vigorously, eg sepsis may impede +ve nitrogen balance. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   584

_OHCM_10e.indb   584

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

585

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Nil by mouth (NBM) before theatre
If in doubt about what is acceptable oral intake prior to induction for general 
anaesthesia (eg for GI surgery), it is best to liaise with the anaesthetist concerned. 
However, guidelines have been published by many colleges and societies to outline 
what is safe in the perioperative period:
  • For adult elective surgery in healthy patients without GI comorbidity:

  •  Water or clear ﬂ uids (eg black tea/coff ee) are allowed up to 2h beforehand.
  • All other intake up to 6h beforehand.

  • In emergency surgery, ≥6h NBM prior to theatre is best—but poor scheduling of 

an emergency list is not an excuse for starving patients for days.

Table 13.6  Daily energy and nutritional requirements

Substance
Energy

Requirement (/kg/d) Notes
20–40kCal

Nitrogen

84–168kJ
0.2–0.4g

Protein
Fat
Carbohydrate
Water
Na/K/Cl

0.5g
3g
2g
25–30mL
1.0mmol each

Normal adult requirements will be 
2000–2500kCal/d; even catabolic patients 
rarely require >2500kCal/d.
Multiply kCal by a factor of 4.2.
6.25g of enteral protein gives 1g of nitrogen. 
Considering nitrogen balance is important 
because although catabolism is inevitable, 
replenishment is vital.
Contains 5kCal/g.
Contains 10kCal/g.
Contains 4kCal/g.
+500mL/d for each °C of pyrexia.
Electrolytes need to be considered, even if 
not on IVI.

_OHCM_10e.indb   585

_OHCM_10e.indb   585

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

586

Parenteral (intravenous) nutrition

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Do not undertake parenteral feeding lightly: it has risks. Specialist advice is vital. 
It should only be considered if the patient is likely to become malnourished with-
out it—this normally means that the gastrointestinal tract is not functioning (eg 
bowel obstruction), and is unlikely to function for at least 7d. Parenteral feeding may 
supplement other forms of nutrition (eg in short bowel syndrome or active Crohn’s 
disease, when nutrition cannot be suffi  ciently absorbed in the gut) or it can be used 
alone (total parenteral nutrition—TPN). Even if there is GI disease, studies show that 
enteral nutrition is safer, cheaper, and at least as effi  cacious as parenteral nutrition 
in the perioperative period.5
Administration  Nutrition  must  be  given  via  a  dedicated  central  venous  line  (or 
peripherally inserted central catheter—PICC line) or via a dedicated lumen of a multi-
lumen catheter (see ﬁ gs 13.9 and 13.10).
Requirements  There  are  many  diff erent  regimens  for  parenteral  feeding.  Most 
provide 2000kCal and 10–14g nitrogen in 2–3L; this usually meets a patient’s daily 
requirements (see table 13.6, p585). ~50% of calories are provided by fat and ~50% 
by carbohydrate. Regimens comprise vitamins, minerals, trace elements, and elec-
trolytes; these will normally be included by the pharmacist.
Complications
  • Sepsis:  (eg  Staphylococcus  epidermidis  and  Staphylococcus  aureus;  Candida; 
Pseudomonas;  infective  endocarditis.)  Look  for  spiking  pyrexia  and  examine 
wound at tube insertion point. Stop PN, take line and peripheral cultures and give 
antibiotics via the line. If central venous line-related sepsis is suspected, the safest 
course of action is always to remove the line. Do not attempt to salvage a line when 
Staph. aureus or Candida infection has been identiﬁ ed.

  • Thrombosis: Central vein thrombosis may occur, resulting in pulmonary embolus 

or superior vena caval obstruction (p528).

  • Metabolic imbalance: Electrolyte abnormalities—see  BOX ‘Refeeding syndrome’; 
deranged plasma glucose; hyperlipidaemia; deﬁ ciency syndromes (table 6.9, p268); 
acid-base disturbance (eg hypercapnia from excessive CO2 production).

  • Mechanical: Pneumothorax; embolism of IV line tip.
Guidelines for success
Liaise closely with line insertion team, nutrition team, and pharmacist.
  • Meticulous sterility. Do not use central venous lines for uses other than nutrition. 

Remove the line if you suspect infection. Culture its tip.

  • Review ﬂ uid balance at least twice daily, and requirements for energy and elec-

trolytes daily.

  • Check weight, ﬂ uid balance, and urine glucose daily during establishment of par-
enteral nutrition. Check plasma glucose, creatinine and electrolytes (including cal-
cium and phosphate), and FBC daily until stable. Check LFT and lipid clearance three 
times a week until stable. Check zinc and magnesium weekly.
  • Do not rush. Achieve the maintenance regimen in small steps.
  • Treat underlying conditions vigorously—eg sepsis may impede +ve nitrogen balance.

5  Enteral feeding promotes integrity of the gut mucosal barrier, thus preventing bacterial and endotoxin 
translocation across the gut wall, which can lead to multiple organ dysfunction and perpetuation of a sys-
temic inﬂ ammatory response—even when the gut is not the primary source of pathology.

_OHCM_10e.indb   586

_OHCM_10e.indb   586

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Refeeding syndrome
This is a life-threatening metabolic complication of refeeding via any route after 
a prolonged period of starvation. At-risk patients include those initiating artiﬁ cial 
feeding (enteral or parenteral) after prolonged starvation, or with malignancy, 
anorexia nervosa, or alcoholism. As the body turns to fat and protein metabolism 
in the starved state, there is a drop in the level of circulating insulin (because of the 
paucity of dietary carbohydrates). The catabolic state also depletes intracellular 
stores of phosphate, although serum levels may remain normal (0.85–1.45mmol/L). 
When refeeding begins, the level of insulin rises in response to the carbohydrate 
load, and one of the consequences is to increase cellular uptake of phosphate.

A hypophosphataemic state (<0.50mmol/L) normally develops within 4d and is 
mostly responsible for the features of ‘refeeding syndrome’, which include: rhab-
domyolysis; red and white cell dysfunction; respiratory insuffi  ciency; arrhythmias; 
cardiogenic shock; seizures; sudden death.
Prevention Give high-dose Pabrinex ® during re-feeding window. Identify at-risk 
patients, assess and monitor closely during refeeding (glucose, lipids, sodium, po-
tassium, phosphate, calcium, magnesium, and zinc). Close involvement of a nutri-
tionist is required.
Treatment is of the complicating features and includes parenteral phosphate ad-
ministration (eg 18mmol/d) in addition to oral supplementation.

587

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

The venous system at the thoracic outlet
When  trying  to  judge  the  position  of  a 
central  venous  line  tip  on  CXR  (see  ﬁ g 
13.10)  it  helps  to  know  the  anatomical 
landmarks  of  the  venous  system  (ﬁ g 
13.9). The subclavian veins join the inter-
nal jugular veins behind the sternoclav-
icular joints to form the brachiocephalic 
veins.  These  come  together  behind  the 
right  1st  sternocostal  joint  to  form  the 
superior  vena  cava  (SVC),  which  runs 
from this point to the right 3rd sterno-
costal joint. The right atrium starts here.

Fig 13.9  Neck veins.

Fig  13.10  Right  arm  PICC  (peripherally  inserted  cen-
tral catheter) still with a wire in the lumen. This is a 
radiograph  at  the  time  of  insertion  to  determine  if 
placement is correct. The tip lies in the  SVC—ie good 
positioning  for  TPN  or  long-term  antibiotic  therapy. 
The  tip  of  a  Hickman  line,  for  cytotoxic  administra-
tion,  is  better  in  the  right  atrium,  to  avoid  possible 
irritation  of  the  SVC  and  consequent  thrombosis  or 
stenosis.  NB:  this  image  was  acquired  in  the  angiog-
raphy  room,  where  radio-opaque  material  appears 
black  (it  is  easier  to  see  contrast  media  against  a 
white background). A similar eff ect may be achieved 
by digitally inverting a standard X-ray.

Image courtesy of Prof. Peter Scally.

_OHCM_10e.indb   587

_OHCM_10e.indb   587

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

588

Diabetic patients undergoing surgery

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Over 10% of surgical patients will have diabetes. This group face a greater risk of post-
operative infection and cardiac complications. Tight glycaemic control is therefore 
essential and improves outcome. Aim to achieve an HbA1C of <69mmol/mol prior to 
elective surgery. Patients are often well informed about their diabetes—involve them 
fully in managing their diabetic care. Check your hospital’s policy for managing dia-
betic patients who will be NBM before surgery. A general guide follows.
Insulin-treated diabetes mellitus
  • Try to place the patient ﬁ rst on the list in order to minimize the fasting period.
  • Give all usual insulin the night before surgery.
  • Long-acting (basal) insulin is usually continued at normal times (eg glargine; de-
temir), even when patients are on a variable rate intravenous insulin infusion (VRIII)—
previously known as a ‘sliding scale’ (see BOX).

  • If on AM list, ensure no subcutaneous rapid-acting (bolus) or mixed insulin is given 
on the morning of surgery. If PM list, give the normal morning bolus insulin, or half 
the mixed insulin dose.

  • If eating and drinking post-operatively, resume the usual insulin with evening meal. 
If AM list (or early PM) and eating a late lunch, give half the morning insulin dose 
with this meal. If not eating until evening, a VRIII may be needed if the capillary 
glucose readings are high.

  • Omit all rapid-acting and mixed insulin while the patient is on a VRIII.
  • It not eating or drinking post-op, start a VRIII 2 hrs prior to surgery. Aim for serum 
glucose levels of 6–10mmol/L and check ﬁ nger-prick glucose every 2 hrs. When 
ready to eat, give normal dose of rapid acting or mixed insulin with the 1st meal 
and stop the VRIII 30–60min later.

  • IV ﬂ uid is required while the patient is on a VRIII: see BOX.
  • A glucose–potassium–insulin (GKI) infusion can be used as an alternative to a VRIII, 

although it is no longer used as standard in the UK.

Tablet-treated diabetes mellitus
  • If  diabetes  is  poorly  controlled  (eg  fasting  glucose  >10mmol/L),  treat  as  for 

 patients on insulin (see earlier in topic).

  • Give usual medications the night before surgery, except long-acting sulfonylureas 
(eg glibenclamide) which can cause prolonged hypoglycaemia when fasting and 
may need to be substituted 2–3 days pre-operatively. Discuss with the diabetes team.
  • If eating and drinking post-operatively: on AM list, omit morning medication and 
take any missed drugs with lunch, after surgery. If PM list, take normal medications 
with breakfast, omit midday doses, and take any missed drugs with a late lunch. 
The dose of these may need reducing, depending on dietary intake.

  • If not eating or drinking post-op, start a VRIII 2 hours prior to surgery. Once eating 

and drinking, oral hypoglycaemics can be restarted.

  • Some  patients  may  need  a  phase  of  subcutaneous  insulin  following  major  sur-
gery—refer to the diabetes team if serum glucose levels are persistently raised.
  • Metformin and iodine IV contrast: Metformin can be continued after IV contrast 
in patients with normal serum creatinine and/or eGFR >60mL/min.  To minimize the 
risk of nephrotoxicity, if serum creatinine is raised or eGFR <60mL/min, stop met-
formin for 48h after contrast and check renal function has returned to baseline 
before restarting.

Diet-controlled diabetes There are usually no problems; patients should be treated 
as if not diabetic (and do not need to be ﬁ rst on the list). Check capillary blood 
glucose peri-operatively. Avoid 5% glucose IVI as this increases blood glucose levels.
Peri-operative morbidity and mortality Diabetes mellitus is classed as an inter-
mediate risk factor for increased peri-operative cardiovascular risk by the American 
Heart Association, so screen for the presence of asymptomatic cardiac and renal 
disease (p567) and be aware of possible ‘silent’ myocardial ischaemia.  Long-term 
post-op survival has been found to be poorer for patients with diabetes; however, 
peri-operative cardiovascular morbidity and mortality were only increased in the 
presence of congestive heart failure and haemodialysis—ie not diabetes alone.

_OHCM_10e.indb   588

_OHCM_10e.indb   588

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

How to write up a variable rate intravenous insulin infusion (VRIII)
Variable rate intravenous insulin infusion (VRIII) is more accurate a term than the 
previously used ‘sliding scale’. Prescribe 50 units of short-acting insulin in 50mL of 
0.9% saline to infuse at the rate shown in table 13.7 (according to blood glucose 
levels). NB: this is a guide only—infusions may vary between institutions and no one 
infusion rate is suitable for all patients.
Table 13.7  Guide to VRIII according to blood glucose levels

589

Capillary blood glucose (mmol/L)
<4 . 0
4 . 1–7 . 0
7 . 1–9. 0
9 . 1–11 . 0
11 . 1–14 . 0
14 . 1–17 . 0
17 . 1–20
>20

IV soluble insulin (rate of infusion)
0 . 5 units/h (0 . 0 if long-acting insulin continued)
1 unit/h
2 units/h
3 units/h
4 units/h
5 units/h
6 units/h
6 units/h; request urgent diabetic review

Fluids should be prescribed to run with the VRIII (through the same cannula via a 
non-return valve). Ideally use 0.45% sodium chloride with 5% glucose and either 
0.15% potassium chloride (KCl) (=20mmol/L) or 0.3% KCl (=40mmol/L). This pro-
vides a constant supply of substrate, but it is not widely available.
Alternatively, use 10% glucose + KCl. This has a lower risk of hypoglycaemia and 
hyponatraemia than 5% glucose. If capillary glucose >15mmol/L when starting 
the VRIII use 0.9% saline until <15mmol/L, then use 10% glucose.
Fluid should infuse at 83–125mL/h (ie 1L over 8–12 hours). Omit potassium if there 
is renal impairment or hyperkalaemia and slow the rate of infusion in heart failure.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   589

_OHCM_10e.indb   589

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

590

Jaundiced patients undergoing surgery

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Avoid operating in patients with obstructive jaundiceΩconsider prior ERCP to relieve. 
There is risk of bleeding, peri-operative infection, and renal failure.
Coagulopathy Vitamin K  in obstruction (requires bile in order to be absorbed. If no 
history of chronic liver disease, give parenteral vitamin K (consider even if clotting is 
normal). FFP may be required in liver disease or active bleeding.
Sepsis Risk due to •bacterial translocation •bacterial colonization of biliary tree 
•neutrophil function. If cholangitis present, give antibiotics. Antibiotic prophylaxis 
for ERCP not recommended unless biliary decompression fails, or there is a history of 
biliary disorders; liver transplantation; presence of a pancreatic pseudocyst; or neu-
tropenia, in which case give oral ciproﬂ oxacin or IV gentamicin (check local policy).
Renal failure Risk post-op due to intestinal absorption of endotoxin (normally lim-
ited by the detergent eff ect of bile). This causes renal vasoconstriction and acute 
tubular necrosis (see p298). The use of lactulose or bile salts pre-op may help. Ensure 
adequate IV ﬂ uids pre- and post-operatively to maintain good urine output. Monitor 
urine output every 2h. Consider central line, inotropes, and furosemide if output poor 
despite adequate hydration. Measure and correct U&E daily.

Surgery in those on anticoagulants

Inform the surgeon and anaesthetist. Risks and beneﬁ ts must be individualized.
Warfarin Minor surgery can be undertaken without stopping (if INR <3.5 it may be 
safe to proceed). In major surgery, stop for 3–5d pre-op. Vitamin K ± FFP or Beriplex® 
may be needed for emergency reversal of INR. One elective option is conversion to 
heparin (stop 6h prior to surgery, and monitor APTT perioperatively). When re-war-
farinizing, give LMWH until INR is therapeutic, as warfarin is initially prothrombotic.
DOACS Decision to stop will be based upon the patient’s risk of having a thromboem-
bolic event and bleeding risk associated with the procedure.4 Where procedure has 
no clinically important bleeding risk it can be performed just before the next DOAC 
dose/18–24h after last dose and dosing restarted 6h post-op. Low bleeding risk pro-
cedure, omit DOAC 24h pre-op. High bleeding risk procedure,omit DOAC 48h pre-op. If 
renal function impaired, may require longer periods of omission pre-op.
Antiplatelets Decision to stop is complex and best discussed with the treating team 
(eg cardiologist or neurologist). Premature discontinuation of clopidogrel in patients 
with drug-eluting stents can lead to stent thrombosis. The bleeding eff ects of aspirin 
are reversed 5d after stopping—check local policy to see if cessation required.

Surgery in those on steroids 

Patients on steroids may not be able to mount an appropriate adrenal response to 
meet the stress of surgery due to suppression of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
(HPA) axis. Extra corticosteroid cover may be required, depending on the type of sur-
gery. Consider cover for any patient taking >5mg/d of prednisolone (or equivalent) 
for more than 2 weeks or any patient who has had their long-term steroid reduced 
in the last 2–4 weeks. There is also potential for HPA suppression in patients taking 
long-term, high-dose inhaled or topical corticosteroids. A guide to supplementation 
follows. Patients should take their normal morning steroid dose.
  • Minor procedures under local anaesthetic: No supplementation required.
  • Moderate procedures: (Eg joint replacement.) Give 50mg hydrocortisone before 

induction and 25mg every 8h for 24h. Resume normal dose thereafter.

  • Major surgery: Give 100mg hydrocortisone before induction and 50mg every 8h for 

24h. After 24h, halve this dose each day until the level of maintenance.

Patients with primary adrenal insuffi  ciency will need extra cover—discuss with an 
endocrinologist. The major risk with adrenal insuffi  ciency is hypotension, so if this is 
encountered without an obvious cause, consider a stat dose of hydrocortisone. See 
p836 for treatment of Addisonian crisis and BNF section 6.3 for steroid dose equivalents.

_OHCM_10e.indb   590

_OHCM_10e.indb   590

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

591

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   591

_OHCM_10e.indb   591

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

592

Minimally invasive and day case surgery

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Laparoscopy was developed within gynaecology and is now in widespread use for 
diagnostic purposes and surgical procedures such as appendicectomy, fundoplica-
tion,  splenectomy,  adrenalectomy,  hernia  repair,  colectomy,  prostatectomy,  and 
nephrectomy. Minimally invasive surgery is also used for thyroidectomy and par-
athyroidectomy.
As a rule of thumb, whatever can be done by laparotomy can also be done with 
the laparoscope. This does not mean that it should be done, but if the surgeon is 
adequately trained, and the patient feels better sooner, has less post-operative pain, 
can  return  to  work  earlier,  and  has  fewer  complications,  then  there  are  obvious 
advantages. Pre-procedure counselling should always discuss the complications of 
laparoscopic surgery (eg accidental damage to other intra-abdominal organs) as 
well as the risk of conversion to an open procedure.
Challenges of minimal access surgery The 2-dimensional visual representation 
and diff erent surgical approach alters the normal appearance of familiar anatomy. 
Palpation is impossible and it may be harder to locate lesions prior to resection. As 
a result, pre-operative imaging may need to be more extensive. A new skill has to be 
learned and taught.
Day-case surgery Advances in surgical techniques as well as perioperative care 
mean better results for the patient (shorter waiting lists, fewer infections, fewer 
days off  work, and patient satisfaction). Many operations can now be performed as 
day cases. Theoretically any procedure is suitable, provided the time under general 
anaesthetic does not exceed ~1h. The use of regional anaesthesia helps to avoid the 
SE of nausea and disorientation that may accompany a general anaesthetic, thus 
facilitating discharge.

Bear in mind that the following groups of patients may not be suitable for day-case 
surgery: •Severe dementia. •Severe learning diffi  culties. •Living alone (and no helpers). 
•Children if supervision diffi  cult—changes in expectation, delays, and pain relief can 
be problematic. •BMI >32 (p244). •ASA category ≥ III (p567) thus potentially unstable 
comorbidities—discuss with the anaesthetist. •Infection at the site of the operation. 

Exposing patients to our learning curves? The jury is still out…
All surgeons get better over time (for a while), as they perform new techniques 
with increasing ease and conﬁ dence. When Wertheim did his ﬁ rst hysterectomies, 
his ﬁ rst dozen patients died—but then one survived. He assumed it was a good 
operation, and pressed ahead. He was a brave man, and thousands of women owe 
their lives to him. But had he tried to do this today, he would have been stopped. 
The UK’s General Medical Council (GMC) and other august bodies tell us that we 
must protect the public by reporting doctors whose patients have low survival 
rates. The reason for this is partly ethical, and partly to preserve self-regulation.
We have the toughest codes of practice and disciplinary procedures of any group 
of workers. It is assumed that doctors are loyal to each other out of self-interest, 
and that this loyalty is bad. This has never been tested formally, and is not evi-
dence-based. We can imagine two clinical worlds: one of constant ‘reportings’ and 
recriminatory audits, and another of trust and team-work. Both are imperfect, 
but we should not assume that the ﬁ rst world would be better for our patients.
When  patients  are  sick  with  fear,  they  do  not,  perhaps,  want  to  know  every-
thing. We may tell to protect ourselves. We may not tell to protect ourselves. 
Perhaps what we should do is, in our hearts, appeal to those 12 dead women-of-
Wertheim—a jury as infallible as sacriﬁ cial—and try to hear their reply. And to 
those who complain that in doing so we are playing God, it is possible to reply with 
some humility that, whatever it is, it does not seem like play.
‘It is amazing what little harm doctors do when one considers all the opportuni-
ties they have.’ M. Twain.

_OHCM_10e.indb   592

_OHCM_10e.indb   592

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

593

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   593

_OHCM_10e.indb   593

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

594

Lumps

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Examine the regional lymph nodes as well as the lump. If the lump is a node, examine 
its area of drainage. Always examine the circulation and nerve supply distal to any lump.
History How long has it been there? Does it hurt? Any other symptoms, eg itch? Any 
other lumps? Is it getting bigger? Ever been abroad? Otherwise well?
Physical exam Remember the 6 S’s: site, size, shape, smoothness (consistency), sur-
face (contour/edge/colour), and surroundings. Other questions: Does it transilluminate 
(see next paragraph)? Is it ﬁ xed/tethered to skin or underlying structures (see BOX)? 
Is it ﬂ uctuant/compressible? Temperature? Tender? Pulsatile (US duplex may help)?
Transilluminable lumps After eliminating as much external light as possible, place 
a bright, thin ‘pen’ torch on the lump, from behind (or at least to the side), so the 
light is shining through the lump towards your eye. If the lump glows red it is said to 
transilluminate—a ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled lump such as a hydrocele is a good example.
Lipomas These benign fatty lumps, occurring wherever fat can expand (ie not scalp 
or palms), have smooth, imprecise margins, a hint of ﬂ uctuance, and are not ﬁ xed 
to skin or deeper structures. Symptoms are only caused via pressure. Malignant 
change very rare (suspect if rapid growth/hardening/vascularization). Multiple scat-
tered lipomas, which may be painful, occur in Dercum’s disease, typically in post-
menopausal women.
Sebaceous cysts Refer to either epidermal (ﬁ g 13.11) or pilar cysts (they are not of 
sebaceous origin and contain keratin, not sebum). They appear as ﬁ rm, round, mobile 
subcutaneous nodules of varying size. Look for the characteristic central punctum. 
Infection is quite common, and foul pus exits through the punctum. They are com-
mon on the scalp, face, neck, and trunk. Treatment: Excision of cyst and contents.
Lymph nodes Causes of enlargement: Infection: Glandular fever; brucellosis;  TB; 
HIV;  toxoplasmosis;  actinomycosis;  syphilis.  Inﬁ ltration:  Malignancy  (carcinoma, 
lymphoma); sarcoidosis.
Cutaneous abscesses Staphylococci are the most common organisms. Haemolytic 
streptococci only common in hand infections. Proteus is a common cause of non-
staphylococcal axillary abscesses. Below the waist, faecal organisms are common 
(aerobes and anaerobes). Treatment: Incise and drain. Boils  (furuncles) are ab-
scesses involving a hair follicle and associated glands. A carbuncle is an area of 
subcutaneous necrosis which discharges itself on to the surface through multiple si-
nuses. Think of hidradenitis suppurativa if recurrent inguinal or axillary abscesses.
Rheumatoid nodules (ﬁ g 13.12) Collagenous granulomas which appear in established 
rheumatoid arthritis on the extensor aspects of joints—especially the elbows (ﬁ g 13.12).
Ganglia Degenerative cysts from an adjacent joint or synovial sheath commonly 
seen on the dorsum of the wrist or hand and dorsum of the foot. May transilluminate. 
50% disappear spontaneously. Aspiration may be eff ective, especially when com-
bined with instillation of steroid and hyaluronidase. For the rest, treatment of choice 
is excision rather than the traditional blow from your bible (the Oxford Textbook of 
Surgery)! See ﬁ g 13.13.
Fibromas These may occur anywhere in the body, but most commonly under the 
skin. These whitish, benign tumours contain collagen, ﬁ broblasts, and ﬁ brocytes.
Dermoid cysts Contain dermal structures and are found at the junction of embry-
onic cutaneous boundaries, eg in the midline or lateral to the eye. See ﬁ g 13.14.
Malignant tumours of connective tissue Fibrosarcomas, lipo sarcomas, leiomyo-
sarcomas (smooth muscle), and rhabdomyosarcomas (striated muscle). These are 
staged using modiﬁ ed TNM system including tumour grade. Needle-core (Trucut®) 
biopsies of large tumours precede excision. Any lesion suspected of being a sarcoma 
should not be simply enucleated. Refer to a specialist.
Neuroﬁ bromas See p514.
Keloids Caused by irregular hypertrophy of vascularized collagen forming raised 
edges at sites of previous scars that extend outside the scar (ﬁ g 13.15). Common in 
dark skin. Treatment can be diffi  cult. Intralesional steroid injections are a mainstay.

_OHCM_10e.indb   594

_OHCM_10e.indb   594

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

In or under the skin?

Intradermal
  • Sebaceous cyst
  • Abscess
  • Dermoid cyst
  • Granuloma.

Subcutaneous
  • Lipoma
  • Ganglion
  • Neuroma
  • Lymph node.

If a lump is intradermal, you cannot draw the skin over it, while if the lump is 
subcutaneous, you should be able to manipulate it independently from the skin.

595

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.11  Epidermal cyst.

Fig 13.12  Rheumatoid nodule.

Copyright www.dermnetnz.org, reproduced with 
permission.

Copyright www.dermnetnz.org, reproduced with 
permission.

Fig 13.13  Ganglion.

Fig 13.14  Dermoid cyst.

Courtesy of John M Erikson, MD, 
Raleigh Hand Centre.

Reproduced from Lewis–Jones, Paediatric 
Dermatology, 2010, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

Fig 13.15  Keloid scar.

Courtesy of East Sussex Hospitals Trust.

_OHCM_10e.indb   595

_OHCM_10e.indb   595

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

596

Skin diagnoses not to be missed

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Malignant tumours
1 Malignant melanoma: (See ﬁ g 13.16.)  :  ≈ 1 . 3:1. UK incidence: ≥10 : 100 000/yr (up 
≥200% in last 20yrs). Commonly aff ects younger patients  early diagnosis is vital. 
Short periods of intense UV exposure is a major cause, particularly in the early years. 
May occur in pre-existing moles. If smooth, well-demarcated, and regular, it is un-
likely to be a melanoma but diagnosis can be tricky. Most melanomas have features 
described by Glasgow 7-point checklist (table 13.8) and ABCDE critera (BOX), but not all. 
If in doubt, refer.
Table 13.8  Glasgow 7-point checklist (refer if ≥3 points, or with 1 point if suspicious)
Major (2 pts each)
 • Change in size
 • Change in shape
 • Change in colour

Minor (1 pt each)
 • Inﬂ ammation 
 • Sensory change
 • Diameter >7mm (unless growth is in the vertical plane)

 • Crusting or bleeding

Superﬁ cial spreading melanomas (70%) grow slowly, metastasize later, and have 
better prognosis than nodular melanomas (10–15%) which invade deeply and me-
tastasize early. Nodular lesions may be amelanotic in ~5%. Others: acral melanomas 
occur on palms, soles, and subungual areas; lentigo maligna melanoma evolves from 
pre-exisiting lentigo maligna. Breslow thickness (depth in mm), tumour stage, and 
presence of ulceration are important prognostic factors. : urgent excision can be cu-
rative. Chemotherapy gives a response in 10–30% with metastatic disease (OHCS p592). 
Ipilimumab, a human monoclonal antibody that blocks CTLA-4, an inhibitory T-cell re-
ceptor, has been shown to improve survival in patients with metastatic melanoma.5,6
2 Squamous cell cancer: Usually presents as an ulcerated lesion, with hard, raised 
edges, in sun-exposed sites. May begin in solar keratoses (see later in topic), or be 
found on the lips of smokers or in long-standing ulcers (=Marjolin’s ulcer). Metastasis 
to lymph nodes is rare, local destruction may be extensive. : excision + radiotherapy to 
treat recurrence/aff ected nodes. See ﬁ g 13.17. NB: the condition may be confused with 
a keratoacanthoma—a fast-growing, benign, self-limiting papule plugged with keratin.
3 Basal cell carcinoma: (AKA rodent ulcer) Nodular: typically a pearly nodule with rolled 
telangiectatic edge, on the face or a sun-exposed site. May have a central ulcer. See 
ﬁ g 13.18. Metastases are very rare. It slowly causes local destruction if left untreated. 
Superﬁ cial: lesions appear as red scaly plaques with a raised smooth edge, often on the 
trunk or shoulders. Cause: (most frequently) UV exposure. : excision; cryotherapy; for 
superﬁ cial BCCS topical ﬂ urouracil or imiquimod (see as for ‘Solar keratoses’).
Pre-malignant tumours
1  Solar  (actinic)  keratoses  appear  on  sun-exposed  skin  as  crumbly,  yellow-white 
crusts. Malignant change to squamous cell carcinoma may occur after several years. 
Treatment: cryotherapy; 5% ﬂ uorouracil cream or 5% imiquimod—work by causing: 
erythema  vesiculation  erosion  ulceration  necrosis  healing epithelialization, 
leaving healthy skin unharmed. Warn patients of expected inﬂ ammatory reaction. See 
BNF for dosing. Alternatively: diclofenac gel (3%, use thinly twice-daily for ≤90d).
2 Bowen’s disease: Slow-growing red/brown scaly plaque, eg on lower legs.  Histology: 
full-thickness dysplasia (carcinoma in situ). It infrequently progresses to squamous 
cell cancer. Penile Bowen’s disease is called Queyrat’s erythroplasia. Treatment: cryo-
therapy, topical ﬂ uorouracil (see as for ‘Solar keratoses’) or photodynamic therapy.
3 See also Kaposi’s sarcoma (p702); Paget’s disease of the breast (p708).
Others •Secondary carcinoma: Most common metastases to skin are from breast, 
kidney, or lung. Usually a ﬁ rm nodule, most often on the scalp. See also acanthosis 
nigricans (p562). •Mycosis fungoides: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma usually conﬁ ned 
to skin. Causes itchy, red plaques (Sézary syndrome-variant also associated with 
erythroderma). •Leucoplakia: This appears as white patches (which may ﬁ ssure) on 
oral or genital mucosa (where it may itch). Frank carcinomatous change may occur. 
•Leprosy: Suspect in any anaesthetic hypopigmented lesion (p441). •Syphilis: Any 
genital ulcer is syphilis until proved otherwise. Secondary syphilis: papular rash—in-
cluding, unusually, on the palms (p412).

_OHCM_10e.indb   596

_OHCM_10e.indb   596

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

ABCDE criteria for diagnosis of melanoma
Asymmetry
Border—irregular
Colour—non-uniform
Diameter >7mm
Elevation

Fig 13.16  Melanoma.

Fig  13.17  Squamous  cell  can-
cer.

Fig  13.18  Basal  cell  carcinoma 
(BCC).

597

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   597

_OHCM_10e.indb   597

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

598

Lumps in the neck 

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Don’t biopsy lumps until tumours within the head and neck have been excluded by 
an ENT surgeon. Culture all biopsied lymph nodes for TB.
Diagnosis (See ﬁ g 13.19.) First, ask how long the lump has been present. If <3wks, 
self-limiting infection is the likely cause and extensive investigation is unwise. Next ask 
yourself where the lump is. Is it intradermal—eg sebaceous cyst with a central punc-
tum (p594)? Is it a lipoma (p594)? If the lump is not intradermal, and is not of recent 
onset, you are about to start a diagnostic hunt over complicated terrain. 85% of neck 
swellings are lymph nodes (examine areas which they serve). Consider TB, viruses such 
as HIV or EBV (infectious mononucleosis), any chronic infection, or, if >20yrs, consider 
lymphoma (hepatosplenomegaly?) or metastases (eg from GI or bronchial or head and 
neck neoplasia), 8% are goitres (p600), and other diagnoses account for 7%.
Tests Do virology and TB tests (p394). US shows lump consistency: cystic, solid, com-
plex, vascular. CT deﬁ nes masses in relation to their anatomical neighbours. CXR may 
show  malignancy  or,  in  sarcoid,  reveal  bilateral  hilar  lymphadenopathy.  Consider 
ﬁ ne-needle aspiration (FNA).
Midline lumps •If patient is <20yrs old, likely diagnosis is dermoid cyst (p594). •If it 
moves up on tongue protrusion and is below the hyoid, likely to be a thyroglossal cyst, 
a ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled sac resulting from incomplete closure of the thyroid’s migration path. : 
Surgery; they are the commonest congenital cervical cystic lump. •If >20yrs old, it is 
probably a thyroid isthmus mass. •If it is bony hard, the diagnosis may be a chon-
droma (benign cartilaginous tumour).
Submandibular triangle (Bordered by the mental process, mandible, and the line 
between the two angles of the mandible.) •If <20yrs, self-limiting lymphadenopathy 
is likely. If >20yrs, exclude malignant lymphadenopathy (eg ﬁ rm and non-tender). 
Is TB likely? •If it is not a node, think of submandibular salivary stone, sialadenitis, 
or tumour (see BOX for Salivary gland pathology).
Anterior triangle (Between midline, anterior border of sternocleidomastoid, and 
the line between the two angles of the mandible.) •Branchial cysts emerge under 
the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid where the upper third meets the mid-
dle third (age <20yrs). Due to non-disappearance of the cervical sinus (where 2nd 
branchial arch grows down over 3rd and 4th). Lined by squamous epithelium, their 
ﬂ uid contains cholesterol crystals. Treat by excision. There may be communication 
with the pharynx in the form of a ﬁ stula. •If lump in the supero-posterior area of the 
anterior triangle, is it a parotid tumour (more likely if >40yrs)? •Laryngoceles are 
an uncommon cause of anterior triangle lumps. They are painless and may be made 
worse by blowing. These cysts are classiﬁ ed as external, internal, or mixed, and may 
be associated with laryngeal cancer. If pulsatile may be: •Carotid artery aneurysm, 
•Tortuous carotid artery, or •Carotid body tumours (chemodectoma). These are 
very rare, move from side to side but not up and down, and splay out the carotid 
bifurcation. They are usually ﬁ rm and occasionally soft and pulsatile. They do not 
usually cause bruits. They may be bilateral, familial, and malignant (5%). Suspect in 
any mass just anterior to the upper third of sternomastoid. Diagnose by duplex USS 
(splaying at the carotid bifurcation) or digital computer angiography. : Extirpation 
by vascular surgeon.
Posterior triangle (Behind sternocleidomastoid, in front of trapezius, above clavi-
cle.) •Cervical ribs may intrude into this area. These are enlarged costal elements 
from C7 vertebra. The majority are asymptomatic but can cause Raynaud’s syndrome 
by compressing subclavian artery and neurological symptoms (eg wasting of 1st dor-
sal interosseous) from pressure on lower trunk of the brachial plexus. •Pharyngeal 
pouches can protrude into the posterior triangle on swallowing (usually left-sided). 
•Cystic hygromas (usually infants) arise from jugular lymph sac. These macrocystic 
lymphatic malformations transilluminate brightly. Treat by surgery or hypertonic sa-
line sclerosant injection. Recurrence can be troublesome. •Pancoast’s tumour (see 
p708). •Subclavian artery aneurysm will be pulsatile.

_OHCM_10e.indb   598

_OHCM_10e.indb   598

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

External carotid
artery

Mylohyoid

Submandibular
nodes

Ant. and Post.
digastric
Submandibular
gland

Hyoid bone
Sternohyoid

Sternothyroid

Common carotid
artery
Sternomastoid

Parotid gland
Parotid nodes

Sternomastoid

Hypoglossal nerve

Tonsillar node

Occipital nodes

Scalenus medius

Internal jugular vein

Omohyoid

Scalenus anterior

Vagus nerve

Subclavian artery

Subclavian vein

599

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.19  Important structures in the head and neck.

Salivary gland pathology
There are three pairs of major salivary glands: parotid, submandibular, and sublin-
gual (there are many minor glands). History: Lumps; swelling related to food; pain. 
Examination: Note external swelling; look for secretions; bimanual palpation for 
stones. Examine VIIth nerve and regional lymph nodes. Cytology: Do FNA.
Acute swelling Think of mumps and HIV. Recurrent unilateral pain and swelling 
is  likely  to  be  from  a  stone.  80%  are  sub-
mandibular.  The  classical  story  is  of  pain 
and swelling on eating—with a red, tender, 
swollen,  but  uninfected  gland.  The  stone 
may be seen on plain X-ray or by sialography 
(ﬁ g 13.20). Distal stones are removed via the 
mouth but deeper stones may require exci-
sion  of  the  gland.  Chronic  bilateral  symp-
toms may coexist with dry eyes and mouth 
and autoimmune disease, eg hypothyroidism, 
Mikulicz’s  or  Sjögren’s  syndrome  (p706  & 
p710)—also bulimia or alcohol excess. Fixed 
swelling may be from a tumour/ALL (ﬁ g 8.49, 
p355), sar coid, amyloid, granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis , or be idiopathic.
Salivary gland tumours (table 13.9) ‘80% are 
in the parotid, 80% of these are pleomorphic adenomas, 80% of these are in the super-
ﬁ cial lobe.’ Deﬂ ection of the ear outwards is a classic sign. Remove any salivary gland 
swelling for assessment if present for >1 month. VIIth nerve palsy means malignancy.
Table 13.9  Types of salivary gland tumours

Fig 13.20  Normal sialogram of the sub-
mandibular  gland.  Wharton’s  (subman-
dibular) duct opens into the mouth near 
the frenulum of the tongue. 

Malignant
Mucoepidermoid
Acinic cell

Benign or malignant
Cystadenolymphoma
Pleomorphic adenoma
Pleomorphic  adenomas  often  present  in  middle  age  and  grow  slowly.  Remove 
by superﬁ cial parotidectomy. Adenolymphomas (Warthin’s tumour): usually older 
men; soft; treat by enucleation. Carcinomas: rapid growth; hard ﬁ xed mass; pain; 
facial palsy. Treatment: surgery + radiotherapy.

Malignant 
Squamous or adeno ca
Adenoid cystic ca

_OHCM_10e.indb   599

_OHCM_10e.indb   599

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

600

Lumps in the thyroid

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

If the thyroid (ﬁ g 13.21) is enlarged (=goitre), ask yourself: 1 Is the thyroid diff usely en-
larged or nodular? 2 Is the patient euthyroid, thyrotoxic (p218), or hypothyroid (p220)?
Diff  use goitre: Causes: Endemic (iodine deﬁ ciency); congenital; secondary to goi-
trogens (substances that  iodine uptake); acute thyroiditis (de Quervain’s); physi-
ological (pregnancy/puberty); autoimmune (Graves’ disease; Hashimoto’s thyroiditis).
Nodular goitre: •Multinodular goitre (MNG): The most common goitre in the UK. 
50% who present with a single nodule actually have MNG. Patients are usually eu-
thyroid, but may become hyperthyroid (‘toxic’).  MNG may be retro- or substernal. 
Hypothyroidism and malignancy within MNG are rare. Plummer’s disease is hyper-
thyroidism with a single toxic nodule (uncommon). •Fibrotic goitre: Eg Reidel’s thy-
roiditis. •Solitary thyroid nodule: typically cyst, adenoma, discrete nodule in MNG 
or malignant (~10%).
Investigations  Check  TSH  and  USS  (solid,  cystic,  complex  or  part  of  a  group  of 
lumps). If abnormal consider: •T4, autoantibodies (p216, eg if Hashimoto’s /Graves’, 
suspected). •CXR with thoracic inlet view (tracheal goitres and metastases?). •Ra-
dionuclide scans (ﬁ g 13.22) may show malignant lesions as hypofunctioning or ‘cold’, 
whereas a hyperfunct ioning ‘hot’ lesion suggests adenoma. •FNA (ﬁ ne-needle aspira-
tion) and cytologyΩwill characterize lesion. A FNA ﬁ nding of a follicular neoplasm 
can be challenging (15–30% malignant)Ωdiscuss with cytopathologist and perform 
molecular diagnostics where available; if any doubt, refer for surgery.
What should you do if high-resolution ultrasound shows impalpable nodules? 
Such thyroid nodules can usually be observed provided they are:
  • <1cm across (which accounts for most; ultrasound can detect lumps <2mm; such 

‘incidentalomas’ occur in 46% of routine autopsies) and are asymptomatic.

  • There is no past history of thyroid cancer or neck irradiation.
  • No family history of medullary cancer (if present, do USS-guided FNA).
Thyroid cancer
1      Papillary: (60%.) Often in younger patients. Spread: lymph nodes and lung (jugulo-
digastric node metastasis is the so-called lateral aberrant thyroid). : total thyroid-
ectomy to remove non-obvious tumour ± node excision ± radioiodine (131I) to ablate 
residual cells. Give levothyroxine to suppress TSH. Prognosis: better if young and .
2      Follicular: (≤25%.) Occurs in middle-age and spreads early via blood (bone, lungs). 
Well-diff erentiated. : total thyroidectomy + T4 suppression + radioiodine ablation.
3      Medullary: (5%.) Sporadic (80%) or part of MEN syndrome (p223). May produce 
calcitonin which can be used as a tumour marker. They do not concentrate iodine. 
Perform a phaeochromocytoma screen pre-op. : thyroidectomy + node clear-
ance. External beam radio therapy may prevent regional recurrence.

4      Lymphoma: (5%.) :≈3:1. May present with stridor or dysphagia. Do full stag-
ing pre-treatment (chemoradiotherapy). Assess histology for mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue (MALT) origin (associated with a good prognosis).

5      Anaplastic: Rare. :≈3:1. Elderly, poor response to any treatment. In the absence 

of unresectable disease, excision + radiotherapy may be tried.

Thyroid  surgery  Plays  a  signiﬁ cant  role  in  the  management  of  thyroid  disease. 
Operations include partial lobectomy or lobectomy (for isolated nodules); and thy-
roidectomy (for cancers, MNG, or Graves’). Indications: Pressure symptoms, relapse 
hyperthyroidism  after  >1  failed  course  of  drug  treatment,  carcinoma,  cosmetic 
reasons, symptomatic patients planning pregnancy. Pre-operative management: 
Render euthyroid pre-op with antithyroid drugs (eg carbimazole up to 20mg/12h PO 
or  propylthiouracil 200mg/12h PO but stop 10d prior to surgery as these increase vas-
cularity). Propranolol up to 80mg/8h PO can be used to control tachycardia or tremor 
associated with hyperthyroidism (continue for 5d post-op). Check vocal cords by in-
direct laryngoscopy pre- and post-op (risk of recurrent laryngeal nerve injury). Check 
serum Ca2+ (and PTH if abnormal). Complications: see p580.

_OHCM_10e.indb   600

_OHCM_10e.indb   600

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

601

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.21  The anatomy of the region of the thyroid gland. The important structures that must be 
considered when operating on the thyroid gland include:
  • Recurrent laryngeal nerve
  • Superior laryngeal nerve
  • Parathyroid glands
  • Trachea
  • Common carotid artery
  • Internal jugular vein (not depicted—see ﬁ g 13.23).

Fig  13.22  Radionuclide  study  of  the  thyroid 
showing  changes  consistent  with  Graves’  dis-
ease (see also hot and cold nodules (p216) and 
nuclear medicine, p738). There is increased up-
take of the radionuclide trace diff usely through-
out both lobes of the gland.
Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig 13.23  Transverse ultrasound of the left lobe 
of the thyroid showing a small low-reﬂ ectivity 
cyst  within  higher-reﬂ ectivity  thyroid  tissue. 
Note the proximity to the gland of the common 
carotid artery and internal jugular vein (the lat-
ter  compressed  slightly  by  pressure  from  the 
probe), both seen beneath the body of sterno-
cleidomastoid muscle.
Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   601

_OHCM_10e.indb   601

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

602

Breast carcinoma 

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Epidemiology Aff ects 1 in 8 ; nearly 60 000 new cases per year in UK (incidence 
increasing). Rare in men (~1% of all breast cancers).
Risk factors Risk is related to family history, age, and uninter rupted oestrogen ex-
posure, hence: nulliparity; 1st pregnancy >30yrs old, early menarche; late menopause; 
HRT; obesity; BRCA genes (p521); not breastfeeding; past breast cancer (metachronous 
rate ≈2%, synchronous rate ≈1%).
Pathology Non-invasive ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is premalignant and seen as 
microcalciﬁ cation on mammography (unifocal or widespread). Non-invasive lobular 
CIS is rarer and tends to be multifocal. Invasive ductal carcinoma is most common 
(~70%) whereas invasive lobular carcinoma accounts for 10–15% of breast cancers. 
Medullary  cancers  (~5%)  tend  to  aff ect  younger  patients  while  colloid/mucoid 
(~2%) tend to aff ect the elderly. Others: papillary, tubular, adenoid-cystic and Pa-
get’s (p708). 60–70% of breast cancers are oestrogen receptor +ve, conveying better 
prognosis. ~30% over-express HER2 (growth factor receptor gene) associated with 
aggressive disease and poorer prognosis.
Investigations (See p82 for history and examination.) All lumps should undergo 
‘triple’ assessment: Clinical examination + histology/cytology + mammography/ul-
trasound; see ﬁ g 13.24.
Staging: Stage 1: Conﬁ ned to breast, mobile. Stage 2: Growth conﬁ ned to breast, 
mobile, lymph nodes in ipsilateral axilla. Stage 3: Tumour ﬁ xed to muscle (but not 
chest wall), ipsilateral lymph nodes matted and may be ﬁ xed, skin involvement larger 
than tumour. Stage 4: Complete ﬁ xation of tumour to chest wall, distant metasta-
ses. Also TNM staging: (p523) T1<2cm, T2, 2–5cm, T3 >5cm, T4, ﬁ xity to chest wall or 
peau d’orange; N1, mobile ipsilateral nodes; N2, ﬁ xed nodes; M1, distant metastases.
Treating local disease (Stage 1–2.)7 •Surgery: Removal of tumour by wide local 
excision  (WLE)  or  mastectomy  ±  breast  reconstruction  +  axillary  node  sampling/
surgical  clearance  or  sentinel  node  biopsy  (BOX  ‘Sentinel  node  biopsy’).  •Radio-
therapy:  Recommended  for  all  patients  with  invasive  cancer  after  WLE.  Risk  of 
recurrence  decreases  from  30%  to  <10%  at  10yrs  and  increases  overall  survival. 
Axillary radiotherapy used if lymph node +ve on sampling and surgical clearance 
not  performed  (risk  of  lymphoedema  and  brachial  plexopathy).  SE:  pneumonitis, 
pericarditis, and rib fractures. •Chemotherapy: Adjuvant chemotherapy improves 
survival and reduces recurrence in most groups of women (consider in all except 
excellent prognosis patients), eg epirubicin + ‘CMF’ (cyclophosphamide + methotrex-
ate + 5-FU). Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has shown no diff erence in survival but may 
facilitate breast-conserving surgery. •Endocrine agents: Aim to  oest rogen activity 
and are used in oestrogen receptor (ER) or progesterone receptor (PR) +ve disease. 
The ER blocker tamoxifen is widely used, eg 20mg/d PO for 5yrs post-op (may rarely 
cause uterine cancer so warn to report vaginal bleeding). Aromatase inhibitors (eg 
anastrozole) targeting peripheral oestrogen synthesis are also used (may be better 
tolerated). They are only used if post-menopausal. If pre-menopausal and an ER+ve 
tumour, ovarian ablation (via surgery or radiotherapy) or GnRH anal ogues (eg gos-
erelin)  recurrence and  survival.  •Support: Breastcare nurses •Reconstruction 
options:  Eg  tissue  expanders/implants/nipple  tattoos,  latissimus  dorsi  ﬂ ap,  TRAM 
(transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous) ﬂ ap.
Treating distant disease (Stage 3–4.)8 Long-term survival is possible and median 
survival is >2yrs. Staging investigations should include CXR, bone scan, liver USS, CT/
MRI or PET-CT (p739), + LFTS and Ca2+. Radiotherapy (p526) to painful bony lesions (bis-
phosphonates, p677, may  pain and fracture risk). Tamoxifen is often used in ER+ve; 
if relapse after initial success, consider chemotherapy. Trastuzumab should be given 
for HER2 +ve tumours, in combination with chemotherapy. CNS surgery for solitary (or 
easily accessible) metastases may be possible; if not—radiotherapy. Get specialist help 
for arm lymphoedema (try decongestive methods ﬁ rst).
Preventing deaths •Promote awareness. •Screening: 2-view mammography every 
3yrs for women aged 47–73 in UK has  breast cancer deaths by 30% in women >50yrs.

_OHCM_10e.indb   602

_OHCM_10e.indb   602

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Breast lump

‘Triple assessment’

1      Clinical examination
2      Radiology: ultrasound for <35yrs; mammography and ultrasound for >35yrs old*
3      Histology/cytology (FNA or core biopsy: US-guided core biopsy is best for new lumps)

Cystic lump
aspirate

Residual 
mass
core biopsy

Clear ﬂ uid
discard ﬂ uid 
and reassure

Solid lump
core biopsy

Malignant
plan 

Clear ﬂ uid
discard ﬂ uid 
and reassure

Bloody ﬂ uid
cytology

Reassurance can be more emphatic if there is no family 
history and biopsy shows a non-proliferative lesion.

Fig 13.24  Triple assessment and investigation of a breast lump.
* US is more accurate at detecting invasive breast cancer, though mammography remains most accurate at 
detecting ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). MRI is used in the assessment of multi focal/bilateral disease and 
patients with cosmetic implants who are identiﬁ ed as high risk.

603

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Sentinel node biopsy
Decreases needless axillary clearances in lymph node Ωve patients.
  • Patent blue dye and/or radiocolloid injected into periareolar area or tumour.
  • A gamma probe/visual inspection is used to identify the sentinel node.
  • The sentinel node is biopsied and sent for histology ± immunohisto chemistry; 

further clearance only if sentinel node +ve.

Sentinel node identiﬁ ed in 90%. False Ωve rates <5% for experienced surgeons.

Prognostic factors in breast cancer
Tumour size, grade, lymph node status, ER/PR status, presence of vascular invasion 
all help assess prognosis. Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) is widely used to 
predict survival and risk of relapse, and to help select appropriate adjuvant sys-
temic therapy. NPI = 0.2 ≈ tumour size (cm) + histological grade + nodal status6
If treated with surgery alone, 10yr survival rates are:  NPI <2.4: 95%;  NPI 2.4–3.4: 
85%; NPI 3.4–4.4: 70%; NPI 4.4–5.4: 50%; NPI >5.4: 20%.

Benign breast disease
Fibroadenoma: Usually presents <30yrs but can occur up to menopause. Benign 
overgrowth of collagenous mesenchyme of one breast lobule. Firm, smooth, mobile 
lump, the ‘breast mouse’. Painless. May be multiple. ⅓ regress, ⅓ stay the same, ⅓ 
get bigger. : observation and reassurance, but if in doubt refer for USS (usually 
conclusive) ± FNA. Surgical excision if large.
Breast cysts: Common >35yrs, esp. perimenopausal. Benign, ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled rounded 
lump. Not ﬁ xed to surrounding tissue. Occasionally painful. : diagnosis conﬁ rmed 
on aspiration (perform only if trained).
Infective mastitis/breast abscesses: Infection of mammary duct often associat-
ed with lactation (usually Staph. aureus). Abscess presents as painful, hot swelling 
of breast segment. : antibiotics. Open incision or percutaneous drainage if abscess.
Duct  ectasia: Typically around menopause. Ducts become blocked and secre-
tions stagnate. Present with nipple discharge (green/brown/bloody) ± nipple re-
traction ± lump. Refer for conﬁ rmation of diagnosis. Usually no  needed. Advise 
to stop smoking.
Fat necrosis: Fibrosis and calciﬁ cation after injury to breast tissue. Scarring re-
sults in a ﬁ rm lump. Refer for triple assessment. No  once diagnosis conﬁ rmed.

6  Nodal status is scored 1–3: 1 = node –ve; 2 = 1–3 nodes +ve; 3 = >3 nodes +ve for breast cancer. Histological 
grade is also scored 1–3.

_OHCM_10e.indb   603

_OHCM_10e.indb   603

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

604

Abdominal masses

As with any mass (see p594), determine size, site, shape, and surface. Find out if it is 
pulsatile and if it is mobile. Examine supraclavicular and inguinal nodes. Is the lump 
ballotable (like bobbing an apple up and down in water)?
Right iliac fossa masses
 • Appendix mass/abscess
 • Caecal carcinoma
 • Crohn’s disease
 • Pelvic mass (see later in 

 • Intussusception
 • TB mass
 • Amoebic abscess
 • Actinomycosis (p389)

 • Transplanted kidney
 • Kidney malformation
 • Tumour in an 

undescended testis.

topic)

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Abdominal distension Flatus, fat, ﬂ uid, faeces, or fetus (p57)? Fluid may be outside 
the gut (ascites) or sequestered in bowel (obstruction; ileus). To demonstrate ascites 
elicit signs of a ﬂ uid thrill and/or shifting dullness (p61).
Causes of ascites
 • Malignancy
 • Infections—esp. TB
 • Albumin (eg nephrosis)
Tests: Aspirate ascitic ﬂ uid (p764) for cytology, culture and albumin;7 US.
Left upper quadrant mass Is it spleen, stomach, kidney, colon, pancreas, or a rare 
cause (eg neuroﬁ broma)? Pancreatic cysts may be true (congenital; cystadenomas; 
retention cysts of chronic pancreatitis; cystic ﬁ brosis) or pseudocysts (ﬂ uid in lesser 
sac from acute pancreatitis).
Splenomegaly Causes are often said to be infective, haematological, neoplastic, etc, 
but grouping by associated feature is more useful clinically:

Ascites with portal hypertension
 • Cirrhosis
 • Budd–Chiari syndrome (p696)
 • IVC or portal vein thrombosis.

 • CCF; pericarditis
 • Pancreatitis
 • Myxoedema.

 • Portal nodes

Splenomegaly with fever With lymphadenopathy With purpura
 • InfectionHS

 (malaria, SBE/IE,

hepatitis,HS EBV,HS TB, CMV, HIV)

 • Sarcoid; malignancy.HS
With arthritis 
 • Sjögren’s syndrome
 • Rheumatoid arthritis; SLE
 • Infection, eg Lyme (p422)
 • Vasculitis/Behçet’s (p556).
With anaemia 
 • Sickle-cell;HS thalassaemiaHS 
 • Leishmaniasis;HS leukaemiaHS
 • Pernicious anaemia (p334)
 • POEMS syn. (p220).

 • Glandular feverHS
 • Leukaemias; lymphoma
 • Sjögren’s syndrome.
With ascites
 • Carcinoma
 • Portal hypertension.HS

 • Septicaemia; typhus
 • DIC; amyloidHS
 • Meningococcaemia.
With a murmur
 • SBE/IE 
 • Rheumatic fever
 • Hypereosinophilia
 • AmyloidHS (p370).

With weight + CNS signs Massive splenomegaly
 • Cancer; lymphoma 
 • TB; arsenic poisoning
 • Paraproteinaemia.HS

 • Malaria (hyper-reactivity 
after chronic exposure)

 • Myeloﬁ brosis; CMLHS
 • Gaucher’s syndromeHS
 • Leishmaniasis.

HS =causes of hepatosplenomegaly.
Smooth hepatomegaly Hepatitis, CCF, sarcoidosis, early alcoholic cirrhosis (a small 
liver is typical later); tricuspid incompetence ( pulsatile liver).
Craggy hepatomegaly Secondaries or 1° hepatoma. (Nodular cirrhosis typically 
causes a small, shrunken liver, not an enlarged craggy one.)
Pelvic masses Fibroids, fetus, bladder, ovarian cysts or malignancies. Is it truly pel-
vic?—Yes, if by palpation you cannot get ‘below it’.
Investigating lumps Check FBC (with ﬁ lm); CRP; U&E; LFT; Ca2+; tumour markers only as 
appropriate. Imaging by CT or US (transvaginal approach may be useful); MRI also has 
a role, eg in assessment of liver masses (p286). Others: TB tests (p394). Biopsy to give 
a tissue diagnosis may be obtained using a ﬁ ne needle guided by CT, US, or endoscopy. 

7  Subtract ﬂ uid albumin from serum albumin to obtain serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG). Gradient 
<11g/L suggests malignancy, infections, or pancreatitis. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   604

_OHCM_10e.indb   604

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

The ﬁ rst successful laparotomy...
In 1809, an American surgeon by the name of Ephraim McDowell performed an 
astonishing operation: the ﬁ rst successful elective laparotomy for an abdominal 
tumour. It was an ovariotomy for an ovarian mass in a 44-year-old who, prior 
to physical examination by McDowell, was believed to be gravid. Not only was 
this feat performed in the age before anaesthesia and antisepsis, but it was also 
performed on a table in the front room of McDowell’s Kentucky home, at that 
time on the frontier of the West in the United States. His account of the opera-
tion makes fascinating reading. While the strength of his diagnostic convictions 
combined with his speed and skill at operating is to be admired (the operation 
took 25 minutes), there is an even more laudable part played in this story. The 
patient, Mrs Jane Todd-Crawford, was fully willing to be involved with what can 
only be described as experimental surgery in the face of uncertainty. She deﬁ ed 
pain simply by reciting psalms and hymns, and was back at home within 4 weeks 
with no complications, ultimately living another 33 years. We would be well served 
in remembering the exceptional commitment of Mrs Todd-Crawford. In the rush 
and hurry of our daily tasks perhaps it is all to easy to forget that the undertak-
ing of surgery today may be no less fear-provoking for patients than it was 200 
years ago.

605

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   605

_OHCM_10e.indb   605

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

606

The acute abdomen

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Someone  who  becomes  acutely  ill  and  in  whom  symptoms  and  signs  are  chieﬂ y 
related to the abdomen has an acute abdomen. Prompt laparotomy is sometimes 
essential: repeated examination is the key to making the decision.
Clinical syndromes that usually require laparotomy
1      Rupture of an organ (Spleen, aorta, ectopic pregnancy.) Shock is a leading sign—
see table 13.10 for assessment of blood loss. Abdominal swelling may be seen. Any 
history of trauma: blunt trauma  spleen; penetrating trauma  liver? Delayed 
rupture of the spleen may occur weeks after trauma. Peritonism may be mild.

2      Peritonitis  (Perforation  of  peptic  ulcer/duodenal  ulcer,  diverticulum,  appendix, 
bowel, or gallbladder.) Signs: prostration, shock, lying still, +ve cough test (p62), 
tenderness (± rebound/percussion pain, p62), board-like abdominal rigidity, guard-
ing, and no bowel sounds. Erect CXR may show gas under the diaphragm (ﬁ g 13.26). 
NB: acute pancreatitis (p636) causes these signs, but does not require a laparotomy 
so don’t be caught out and always check serum amylase.

Syndromes that may not require a laparotomy
Local peritonitis: Eg diverticulitis, cholecystitis, salpingitis, and appendicitis (the lat-
ter will need surgery). If abscess formation is suspected (swelling, swinging fever, 
and WCC) do US or CT. Drainage can be percutaneous (US or CT-guided), or by lapa-
rotomy. Peritoneal inﬂ ammation can cause localized ileus with a ‘sentinel loop’ of 
intraluminal gas visible on plain AXR (p729).
Colic is a regularly waxing and waning pain, caused by muscular spasm in a hollow 
viscus, eg gut, ureter, salpinx, uterus, bile duct, or gallbladder (in the latter, pain is 
often dull and constant). Colic, unlike peritonitis, causes restlessness and the patient 
may well be pacing around when you go to review!
Obstruction of the bowel See p610.
Tests U&E; FBC; amylase; LFT; CRP; lactate (is there mesenteric ischaemia?); urinalysis. 
Urine and serum hCG is vital to exclude ectopic pregnancy. Erect CXR (ﬁ g 13.26), 
AXR may show Rigler’s sign (p728). Laparoscopy may avert open surgery. CT can be 
helpful provided it is readily available and causes no delay (pp732–3); US may identify 
perforat ion or free ﬂ uid (appropriate performer training is important).
Pre-op Don’t rush to theatre. Anaesthesia compounds shock, so resuscitate prop-
erly ﬁ rst (p790) unless blood being lost faster than can be replaced, eg ruptured 
ectopic pregnancy, (OHCS p262), aneurysm leak (p654), trauma.
Plan Bed rest, keep NBM; assess volume status (BOX) and treat shock (p790); cross-
match/group  and  save;  analgesia  (p574);  arrange  imaging;  consider  need  for  IVI, 
blood cultures, and antibiotics (eg piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5g/8h IV); ECG.
The medical acute abdomen Irritable bowel syndrome (p266) is the chief cause, so 
always ask about episodes of pain associated with loose stools, relieved by defeca-
tion, bloating, and urgency (but not blood—this may be UC). Other causes:
Myocardial infarction
Gastroenteritis or UTI
Diabetes mellitus/DKA (p206) Zoster (p404)
Bornholm disease
Pneumococcal peritonitis
Henoch–Schönlein (p702)
Tabes dorsalis (p412)

Malaria (p416)
Typhoid fever (p415)
Cholera (p430)
Yersinia enterocolitica (p431)
Lead colic 

Pneumonia (p166)
Thyroid storm (p834) Phaeochromocytoma (p837)

Tuberculosis (p393)
Porphyria (p692)
Narcotic addiction
PAN (p556)

Sickle-cell crisis (p341)

Hidden diagnoses Mesenteric ischaemia (p620), acute pancreatitis (p636), and 
leaking AAA (p654) are the Unterseeboote of the acute abdomen—unsuspected, 
undetectable unless carefully looked for, and underestimatedly deadly. They may 
have non-speciﬁ c symptoms and signs that are surprisingly mild, so always think 
of  them  when  assessing  the  acute  abdomen  and  hopefully  you  will  ‘spot’  them! 
Finally: always exclude pregnancy (± ectopic?) in females.

_OHCM_10e.indb   606

_OHCM_10e.indb   606

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

607

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.25  Causes of abdominal pain.

Assessing hypovolaemia from blood loss
Treat suspected shock rather than wait for BP to fall. The most likely cause of 
shock in a surgical patient is hypovolaemia. Check urine output, GCS, and capillary reﬁ ll 
(CR) as measures of renal, brain, and skin perfusion.

When there is any blood loss, assess the status of the following:

Table 13.10  Estimating blood loss based on patient’s initial presentation

Parameter
Blood loss

Pulse

BP
Pulse pressure
Respirations
Urine output
Mental state
Fluid to give

Class I

Class II

<750mL
<15%
<100bpm

 or 
14–20/min
>30mL/h
Slightly anxious
Crystalloid

750–1500mL
15–30%
>100bpm


20–30/min
20–30mL/h
Anxious
Crystalloid

Class III
1500–2000mL
30–40%
>120bpm


30–40/min
5–15mL/h
Confused 

Class IV

>2000mL
>40%
>140bpm


>35/min
Negligible
Lethargic

Crystalloid + blood

Assumes a body mass of 70kg.
An adaptation of ‘Estimated blood loss based on initial presentation’ table from the 9th edition of the 
Advanced Trauma Life Support Manual. Adapted with permission from the American College of Surgeons.

Fig  13.26  Erect  CXR  showing  air  beneath 
the  right  hemidiaphragm,  indicating  pres-
ence of a pneumo peritoneum. Causes:
  • Bowel  perforation  (visible  only  in  75%)

(ﬁ g 13.25).

  • Gas-forming infection, eg C. perfringens.
  • Iatrogenic,  eg  laparoscopic  surgery  (de-

tectable on CXR up to 10d post-op).

  • Per vaginam (eg sexual activity).
  • Interposition of bowel between liver and di-
aphragm (Chilaiditi sign—not true free air).
Image courtesy of Mr P. Paraskeva.

_OHCM_10e.indb   607

_OHCM_10e.indb   607

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

608

Acute appendicitis

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Incidence Most common surgical emergency (lifetime incidence = 6%). Can occur 
at any age, though highest incidence is between 10–20yrs.8 It is rare before age 2 
because the appendix is cone shaped with a larger lumen.
Pathogenesis Gut organisms invade the appendix wall after lumen obstruction by 
lymphoid hyperplasia, faecolith, or ﬁ larial worms. This leads to oedema, ischaemic 
necrosis, and perforation.
Presentation Classically periumbilical pain that moves to the RIF. Associated signs 
may include tachycardia, fever, peritonism with guarding and rebound or percussion 
tenderness in RIF. Pain on right during PR examination suggests an inﬂ ammed, low-
lying pelvic appendix. Anorexia is an important feature; vomiting is rarely promi-
nent—pain normally precedes vomiting in the surgical abdomen. Constipation is 
usual, though diarrhoea may occur. Additional signs: Rovsing’s sign (pain > in RIF 
than LIF when the LIF is pressed). Psoas sign (pain on extending hip if retrocaecal 
appendix). Cope sign (pain on ﬂ exion and internal rotation of right hip if appendix in 
close relation to obturator internus).
Investigations Blood tests may reveal neutrophil leucocytosis and elevated CRP. US 
may help, but the appendix is not always visualized. CT has high diagnostic accuracy 
and is useful if diagnosis is unclear: it reduces Ωve appendicectomy rate.
Variations in the clinical picture
  • Inﬂ ammation in a retrocecal/retroperitoneal appendix (2.5%) may cause ﬂ ank or 

RUQ pain; its only sign may be tenderness on the right on PR.

  • The child with vague abdominal pain who will not eat their favourite food.
  • The shocked, confused octogenarian who is not in pain.
  • Appendicitis  occurs  in  ~1/1000  pregnancies.  Mortality  is  higher,  especially  from 
20wks’ gestation. Perforation is more common, and increases fetal mortality. Pain is 
often less well localized (may be RUQ) and signs of peritonism less obvious.

Hints
  • If a child is anxious, use their hand to press their tummy.
  • Check for recent viral illnesses and lymphadenopathy—mesenteric adenitis?
  • Don’t start palpating in the RIF (makes it diffi  cult to elicit pain elsewhere).
  • Expect diagnosis to be wrong half the time. If diagnosis is uncertain, re-examine 

often. A normal appendix is removed in up to 20% of patients.

Treatment Prompt appendicectomy (ﬁ g 13.27). Antibiotics: piperacillin/tazobac-
tam 4.5g/8h, 1 to 3 doses IV starting 1h pre-op, reduces wound infections. Give a long-
er course if perforated. Laparoscopy: Has dia gnostic and therapeutic advantages 
(if surgeon experienced), especially in women and the obese. It is not recommended 
in cases of suspected gangrenous per for ation as the rate of abscess formation may 
be higher.
Complications
  • Perforation is commoner if a faecolith is present and in young children, as the 

diagnosis is more often delayed.

  • Appendix mass may result when an inﬂ amed appendix becomes covered with omen-
tum.  US/CT  may  help  with  diagnosis.  Some  advocate  early  surgery.  Alternatively, 
initial conservative management—NBM and antibiotics. If the mass resolves, some 
perform an interval (ie delayed) appendicectomy. Exclude a colonic tumour (lapa-
rotomy or colonoscopy), which can present as early as the 4th decade.

  • Appendix abscess May result if an appendix mass fails to resolve but enlarges 
and the patient gets more unwell. Treatment usually involves drainage (surgical or 
percutaneous under US/CT-guidance). Antibiotics alone may bring resolution. 

8  There is a second peak between 60–70yrs; older adults may present later with atypical symptoms.

_OHCM_10e.indb   608

_OHCM_10e.indb   608

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Explaining the patterns of abdominal pain
Internal organs and the visceral peritoneum have no somatic innervation, so the 
brain attributes the visceral (splanchnic) signals to a physical location whose der-
matome corresponds to the same entry level in the spinal cord. Importantly, there 
is no laterality to the visceral unmyelinated C-ﬁ bre pain signals, which enter the 
cord bilaterally and at multiple levels. Division of the gut according to embryologi-
cal origin is the important determinant here: see table 13.11.
Table 13.11  Somatic referral of abdominal pain

Somatic referral Arterial supply

Gut Division points 
Fore Proximal to 2nd part of duodenum Epigastrium
Periumbilical
Mid Above to ⅔ along transverse colon
Hind Distal to above
Suprapubic
Early inﬂ ammation irritates the structure and walls of the appendix, so a colicky 
pain is referred to the mid-abdomen—classically periumbilical. As the inﬂ ammation 
progresses and irritates the parietal peritoneum (especially on examination), the 
somatic, lateralized pain settles at McBurney’s point, ⅔ of the way along from the 
umbilicus to the right anterior superior iliac spine.

Coeliac axis
Superior mesenteric
Inferior mesenteric

609

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

These principles also help us understand patterns of referred pain. In pneumo-
nia, the T9 dermatome is shared by the lung and the abdomen. Also, irritation of 
the underside of the diaphragm (sensory innervation is from above through the 
phrenic nerve, C3–5) by an inﬂ amed gallbladder or a subphrenic abscess refers pain 
to the right shoulder: dermatomes C3–5.



 • Ectopic (do a pregnancy 

test!)

 • UTI (test urine!)
 • Mesenteric adenitis
 • Cystitis.

 • Cholecystitis
 • Diverticulitis
 • Salpingitis/PID
 • Dysmenorrhoea

 • Crohn’s disease
 • Perforated ulcer
 • Food poisoning
 • Meckel’s diverticulum

Fig 13.27  Appendicectomy.

Reproduced from McLatchie et 
al., Operative Surgery, 2006, with 
permission from Oxford University 
Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   609

_OHCM_10e.indb   609

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

610

Obstruction of the bowel

Cardinal features of intestinal obstruction •Vomiting,9 nausea and anorexia.•Colic 
occurs early ( in long-standing obstruction). •Constipation may be absolute (ie no 
faeces or ﬂ atus passed) in distal obstruction; less pronounced if obstruction is high. 
•Abdominal distension  as the obstruction progresses with active, ‘tinkling’ bowel 
sounds.
The key decisions
1      Is it obstruction of the small or large bowel? In small bowel obstruction, vomiting 
occurs early, distension is less, and pain is higher in the abdomen; in large bowel 
obstruction, pain is more constant. The AXR plays a key role (ﬁ g 13.28 & p728).

2      Is there an ileus or mechanical obstruction? Ileus is functional obstruction from 
bowel  motility  (see  BOX  ‘Paralytic  ileus  or  pseudo-obstruction?’  &  p728).  Bowel 
sounds are absent; pain tends to be less.

3      Is the obstructed bowel simple/closed loop/strangulated? Simple: one obstruct-
ing point and no vascular compromise. Closed loop: obstruction at two points (eg 
sigmoid volvulus) forming a loop of grossly distended bowel at risk of perforation. 
Strangulated: blood supply is compromised and the patient is iller than you would 
expect. There is sharper, more constant, and localized pain. Peritonism is the cardi-
nal sign. There may be fever + WCC with other signs of mesenteric ischaemia (p620).

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Causes See table 13.12.
Table 13.12  Causes of bowel obstruction
Causes: small bowel
 • Adhesions (p581)
 • Hernias (p612)

Causes: large bowel
 • Colon ca (p616)
 • Constipation (p260)
 • Diverticular stricture
 • Volvulus
 • Sigmoid (see BOX ‘Sigmoid 

Rarer causes
 • Crohn’s stricture
 • Gallstone ileus (p634)
 • Intussusception
 • TB (developing world)
 • Foreign body

volvulus’)

 • Caecal

Management
  • General principles: Cause, site, speed of onset, and completeness of obstruction 
determine deﬁ nitive therapy: strangulation and large bowel obstruction require 
surgery; ileus and incomplete small bowel obstruction can be managed conserva-
tively, at least initially.

  • Immediate action: ‘Drip and suck’—NGT and IV ﬂ uids to rehydrate and correct 
electrolyte imbalance (p668). Being NBM does not give adequate rest for the bowel 
because it can produce up to 9L of ﬂ uid/d. Also: analgesia, blood tests (inc. amylase, 
FBC, U&E), AXR, erect CXR, catheterize to monitor ﬂ uid status.

  • Further imaging: CT to establish the cause of obstruction (may show dilated, ﬂ uid-
ﬁ lled bowel and a transition zone at the site of obstruction—ﬁ gs 13.29, 13.30). Oral 
Gastrograﬁ n® prior to CT can help identify level of obstruction and may have mild 
therapeutic action against mechanical obstruction. Consider investigating the cause 
of large bowel obstruction by colonoscopy but beware risk of perforation.

  • Surgery: Strangulation needs emergency surgery. Closed loop obstruction may 
be managed with surgery or endoscopic decompression attempted. Endoscopic 
stenting may be used for obstructing large bowel malignancies either in palliation 
or  as  a  bridge  to  surgery  in  acute  obstruction  (p616).  Small  bowel  obstruction 
secondary to adhesions should rarely lead to surgery—see BOX, p581.

9  Fermentation of the intestinal contents in established obstruction causes ‘faeculent’ vomit ing. True ‘fae-
cal’ vomiting is found when there is a colonic ﬁ stula with the proximal gut. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   610

_OHCM_10e.indb   610

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

611

Paralytic ileus or pseudo-obstruction?
Paralytic ileus is adynamic bowel due to the absence of normal peristaltic con-
tractions.  Contributing  factors  include  abdominal  surgery,  pancreatitis  (or  any 
localized peritonitis), spinal injury, hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, uraemia, perito-
neal sepsis and drugs (eg tricyclic antidepressants).
Pseudo-obstruction resembles mechanical GI obstruction but with no obstruct-
ing lesion. Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction is called Ogilvie’s syndrome (p706), 
and clinical features are similar to that of mechanical obstruction. Predisposing 
factors:  puerperium;  pelvic  surgery;  trauma;  cardiorespiratory  and  neurological 
disorders. Treatment: Neostigmine or colonoscopic decompression are sometimes 
useful. In chronic pseudo-obstruction weight loss from malabsorption is a problem.

Sigmoid volvulus
Sigmoid volvulus occurs when the bowel twists on its mesentery, which can pro-
duce severe, rapid, strangulated obstruction (ﬁ g 13.28c). It tends to occur in the 
elderly, constipated, and comorbid patient, and is managed by insertion of a ﬂ atus 
tube or sigmoidoscopy. Sigmoid colectomy is sometimes required. If not treated 
successfully, it can progress to perforation and fatal peritonitis.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig 13.28  (a) Small bowel obstruction: AXR shows central gas shadows with valvulae conniventes 
that completely cross the lumen and no gas in the large bowel. (b) Large bowel obstruction: AXR 
shows peripheral gas shadows proximal to the blockage (eg in caecum) but not in the rectum. 
(c) Sigmoid volvulus: there is a characteristic AXR with an ‘inverted U’ loop of bowel that looks a bit 
like a coff ee bean.

Images (a), (b), and (c) reproduced from Darby et al., Oxford Handbook of Medical Imaging, 2011, with 
permission from Oxford University Press.

Fig  13.29  Unenhanced  axial  CT  of  the  ab-
domen  showing  multiple  loops  of  dilated, 
ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled small bowel in a patient with small 
bowel obstruction.

Fig 13.30  Axial CT of the abdomen post-oral con-
trast showing dilated loops of ﬂ uid and air-ﬁ lled 
large  bowel  (contrast  medium  is  in  the  small 
bowel).

Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

_OHCM_10e.indb   611

_OHCM_10e.indb   611

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

612

Abdominal hernias

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Deﬁ nition The protrusion of a viscus or part of a viscus through a defect of the 
walls of its containing cavity into an abnormal position. See ﬁ g 13.31. Terminology:
  • Irreducible: contents cannot be pushed back into place (see p614 for technique).
  • Obstructed: bowel contents cannot pass—features of intestinal obstruction (p610).
  • Strangulated: ischaemia occurs—the patient requires urgent surgery.
  • Incarceration: contents of the hernial sac are stuck inside by adhesions.
Care must be taken with reduction as it is possible to push an incarcerated hernia 
back into the abdominal cavity, giving the initial appearance of successful reduction.
Inguinal hernia The commonest type in both  &  (but >>), p614.
Femoral  hernia  Bowel  enters  the  femoral  canal,  presenting  as  a  mass 
in  the  upper  medial  thigh  or  above  the  inguinal  ligament  where  it  points 
down  the  leg,  unlike  an  inguinal  hernia  which  points  to  the  groin.  They  oc-
cur  more  often  in    especially  in  middle  age  and  the  elderly.  They  are  likely 
to  be  irreducible  and  to  strangulate  due  to  the  rigidity  of  the  canal’s  borders. 
Anatomy:See  ﬁ g  13..32  Differential  diagnosis:  (See  p651.)  1  Inguinal  hernia. 
2 Saphena varix. 3 An enlarged Cloquet’s node (p615). 4 Lipoma. 5 Femoral aneurysm. 
6 Psoas abscess. Treatment: Surgical repair is recommended. Herniotomy is ligation 
and excision of the sac, herniorrhaphy is repair of the hernial defect.
Paraumbilical hernias occur just above or below the umbilicus. Risk factors are 
obesity and ascites. Omentum or bowel herniates through the defect. Surgery in-
volves repair of the rectus sheath (Mayo repair).
Epigastric hernias pass through linea alba above the umbilicus.
Incisional hernias follow breakdown of muscle closure after surgery (11–20%). If 
obese, repair is not easy. Mesh repair has recurrence but infection over sutures. 
Spigelian hernias occur through the linea semilunaris at the lateral edge of the 
rectus sheath, below and lateral to the umbilicus.
Lumbar hernias occur through the inferior or superior lumbar triangles in the pos-
terior abdominal wall.
Richter’s hernias involve bowel wall only—not the whole lumen.
Maydl’s hernias involve a herniating ‘double loop’ of bowel. The strangulated por-
tion may reside as a single loop inside the abdominal cavity.
Littré’s hernias are hernial sacs containing strangulated Meckel’s diverticulum.
Obturator hernias occur through the obturator canal. Typically there is pain along 
the medial side of the thigh in a thin woman.
Sciatic hernias pass through the lesser sciatic foramen (a way through var ious 
pelvic ligaments). GI obstruction + a gluteal mass suggests this rare possibility.
Sliding  hernias  contain  a  partially  extraperitoneal  structure  (eg  caecum  on  the 
right, sigmoid colon on the left). The sac does not completely surround the contents.
Paediatric hernias include Umbilical hernias: (3% of live births). Are a result of a 
persistent defect in the transversalis fascia. Surgical repair rarely needed as most 
resolve by the age of 3. Indirect inguinal hernias (~ 4% of all  infants due to patent 
processus vaginalis—prematurity is a risk factor; uncommon in  infants—consider 
testicular feminization.) Surgical repair is required. Gastroschisis: Protrusion of the 
abdominal contents through a defect in the anterior abdominal wall to the right of 
the umbilicus. Prompt surgical repair required.  Exomphalos: Abdominal contents 
are found outside the abdomen, covered in a three-layer membrane consisting of 
peritoneum, Wharton’s jelly, and amnion. Surgical repair less urgent because the 
bowel is protected by these membranes. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   612

_OHCM_10e.indb   612

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

613

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.31  Some examples of hernias.

Fig 13.32  The boundaries of the femoral canal are anteriorly the ingui-
nal ligament; medially the lacunar ligament (and pubic bone); laterally 
the femoral vein (and iliopsoas); and posteriorly the pectineal ligament 
and pectineus. The canal contains fat and Cloquet’s node. The neck of 
the hernia is felt inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle (inguinal her-
nias are superior and medial to this point).

_OHCM_10e.indb   613

_OHCM_10e.indb   613

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

614

Inguinal hernias

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Indirect hernias pass through the internal inguinal ring and, if large, out through 
the external ring (ﬁ g. 13.33). Direct hernias push their way directly forward through 
the posterior wall of the inguinal canal, into a defect in the abdominal wall (Hes-
selbach’s triangle; medial to the inferior epigastric vessels and lateral to the rectus 
abdominus). Predisposing conditions: males (:≈8:1), chronic cough, constipation, 
urinary obstruction, heavy lifting, ascites, past abdominal surgery (eg damage to the 
iliohypogastric nerve during appendicectomy). There are two landmarks to identify: 
the deep (internal) ring may be deﬁ ned as being the mid-point of the inguinal liga-
ment, ~1½ cm above the femoral pulse (which crosses the mid-inguinal point); the 
superﬁ cial (external) ring is a split in the external oblique aponeurosis just superior 
and medial to the pubic tubercle (the bony prominence forming the medial attach-
ment of the inguinal ligament).
Examination  Look  for  previous  scars;  feel  the  other  side  (more  common  on  the 
right); examine the external genitalia. Then ask: •Is the lump visible? If so, ask the 
patient to reduce it—if he cannot, make sure that it is not a scrotal lump. Ask him 
to cough. Appears above and medial to the pubic tubercle. •If no lump is visible, 
feel for a cough impulse. •Repeat the examination with the patient standing. Dis-
tinguishing direct from indirect hernias: This is loved by examiners but is of little 
clinical  use—not  least  because  repair  is  the  same  for  both  (see  ‘Repairs’  later  in 
topic). The best way is to reduce the hernia and occlude the deep (internal) ring 
with two ﬁ ngers. Ask the patient to cough or stand—if the hernia is restrained, it is 
indirect; if not, it is direct. The ‘gold standard’ for determining the type of inguinal 
hernia is at surgery: direct hernias arise medial to the inferior epigastric vessels; 
indirect hernias are lateral.
Indirect hernias:
 • Common (80%)
 • Can strangulate.

Femoral hernias:
 • More frequent in females
 • Frequently irreducible
 • Frequently strangulate.

Direct hernias:
 • Less common (20%)
 • Reduce easily
 • Rarely strangulate.

Irreducible hernias You may be called because a long-standing hernia is now ir-
reducible and painful. It is always worth trying to reduce these yourself to prevent 
strangulation and necrosis (demanding prompt laparotomy). Learn how to do this 
from an expert, ie one of your patients who has been reducing his hernia for years. 
Then you will know how to act correctly when the emergency presents. Notice that 
such patients use the ﬂ at of the hand, directing the hernia from below, up towards 
the contralateral shoulder. Sometimes, as the hernia obstructs, reduction requires 
perseverance, which may be rewarded by a gurgle from the retreating bowel and a 
kiss from the attending spouse who had thought that surgery was inevitable.
Repairs Weight loss (if over-weight) and stop smoking pre-op. Warn that hernias 
may recur and patients should be counselled about possibility of chronic pain post-
operatively. Mesh techniques (eg Lichtenstein repair) have replaced older methods. 
In  mesh  repairs,  a  polypropylene  mesh  reinforces  the  posterior  wall.  Recurrence 
rate is less than with other methods (eg <2% vs 10%). (CI: strangulated hernias, con-
tamination with pus/bowel contents.) Local anaesthetic techniques and day-case 
‘ambulatory’ surgery may halve the price of surgery. This is important because this 
is one of the most common operations (>100 000 per year in the UK). Laparoscopic 
repair gives similar recurrence rates. Methods include transabdominal pre-perito-
neal (TAPP) in which the peritoneum is entered and the hernia repaired, and totally 
extraperitoneal (TEP), which decreases the risk of visceral injury. For beneﬁ ts of lapa-
roscopic surgery see p592.
Return to work: Will depend upon surgical approach and patient—discuss this pre-
operatively. Rest for 4wks and convalescence over 8wks with open approaches, but 
laparoscopic repairs may allow return to manual work (and driving) after ≤2wks if 
all is well.

_OHCM_10e.indb   614

_OHCM_10e.indb   614

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Anterior superior 
iliac spine
Deep inguinal ring
Indirect inguinal hernia

Deep inguinal node

Femoral

Nerve
Artery
Vein

Inferior epigastric
vessels

615

Direct inguinal hernia
Course of spermatic cord
Superﬁcial ring

Pubic tubercle

Femoral hernia
Cloquet’s node

Fig 13.33  Anatomy of the inguinal canal. Floor: Inguinal ligament and lacunar ligament medially; 
Roof: Fibres of transversalis, internal oblique; Anterior: External oblique aponeurosis + internal 
oblique for the lateral ⅓ ; Posterior: Laterally, transversalis fascia; medially, conjoint tendon.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

The contents of the inguinal canal in the male
  • The external spermatic fascia (from external oblique), cremasteric fascia (from 
internal  oblique  and  transverses  abdominus),  and  internal  spermatic  fascia 
(from transversalis fascia) covering the cord.

  • The spermatic cord:

  • Vas deferens, obliterated processus vaginalis, and lymphatics.
  • Arteries to the vas, cremaster, and testis.
  • The pampiniform plexus and the venous equivalent of the above.
  • The genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve and sympathetic nerves.
  • The ilioinguinal nerve, which enters the inguinal canal via the anterior wall and 

runs anteriorly to the cord.

NB: in the female the round ligament of the uterus is in place of the male structures. 
A hydrocele of the canal of Nuck is the female equivalent of a hydrocele of the cord.

_OHCM_10e.indb   615

_OHCM_10e.indb   615

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

616

Colorectal carcinoma

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

This  is  the  3rd  most  common  cancer  and  2nd  most  common  cause  of  UK  cancer 
deaths  (16 000  deaths/yr).  Usually  adenocarcinoma.  86%  of  presentations  are  in 
those >60yrs old.  Lifetime UK incidence:  = 1 : 15;  = 1 : 19.
Predisposing  factors  Neoplastic  polyps  (see  BOX  &  p520);  IBD  (UC and  Crohn’s); 
genetic predisposition (<8%), eg FAP and HNPCC (see p521); diet (low-ﬁ bre; red and 
processed  meat);  alcohol ;  smoking;  previous  cancer.  Prevention:  While  routine 
chemoprevention is not currently recommended due to gastrointestinal SES, aspirin 
≥75mg/d  reduces incidence and mortality.
Presentation depends on site: Left-sided: Bleeding/mucus PR; altered bowel habit 
or  obstruction  (25%);  tenesmus;  mass  PR  (60%).  Right:  Weight;  Hb;  abdominal 
pain;  obstruction  less  likely.  Either:  Abdominal  mass;  perforation;  haemorrhage; 
ﬁ stula. See p522 for a guide to urgent referral criteria. See ﬁ g 13.34 for distribution.
Tests FBC (microcytic anaemia); faecal occult blood (FOB, see BOX); sigmoidoscopy or 
colonoscopy (ﬁ gs 6.7 & 6.8, p249), which can be done ‘virtually’ by CT (ﬁ g 16.31, p743); LFT; 
liver MRI/US. CEA (p531) may be used to monitor disease and eff ectiveness of treatment. 
If family history of FAP, refer for DNA test once >15yrs old.
Spread Local, lymphatic, by blood (liver, lung, bone) or transcoelomic. The TNM sys-
tem (Tumour, Node, Metastases see table 13.13 and p523) is used to stage disease 
and is preferred to the older Dukes’ classiﬁ cation (Dukes A: limited to muscularis 
mucosae; Dukes B: extension through muscularis mucosae; Dukes C: involvement of 
regional lymph nodes).
Surgery aims to cure and may   survival times by up to 50%. In elective surgery, 
anastomosis  is  typically  achieved  at  the  1st  operation.  Laparoscopic  surgery  has 
revolutionized surgery for colon cancer. It is as safe as open surgery and there is no 
diff erence in overall survival or disease recurrence. •Right hemicolectomy for caecal, 
ascending, or proximal transverse colon tumours. •Left hemicolectomy for tumours in 
distal transverse or descending colon. •Sigmoid colectomy for sigmoid tumours. •An-
terior resection for low sigmoid or high rectal tumours. •Abdomino-perineal (AP) re-
section for tumours low in the rectum (8cm from anus): permanent colostomy and 
removal of rectum and anus. •Hartmann’s procedure in emergency bowel obstruc-
tion, perforation, or palliation (p582). •Transanal endoscopic microsurgery allows 
local excision through a wide proctoscope for localized rectal disease. Endoscopic 
stenting should be considered for palliation in malignant obstruction and as a bridge 
to surgery in acute obstruction. Stenting  need for colostomy, has less complica-
tions than emergency surgery, shortens intensive care and total hospital stays, and 
prevents unnecessary oper ations. Surgery with liver resection may be curative if 
single-lobe hepatic metastases and no extrahepatic spread.
Radiotherapy is mostly used in palliation for colonic cancer. It is occasionally used 
pre-op in rectal cancer to allow resection. Post-op radiotherapy is only used in pa-
tients with rectal tumours at high risk of local recurrence.
Chemotherapy Adjuvant chemotherapy for stage 3 disease has been shown to re-
duce disease recurrence by 30% and mortality by 25%. Beneﬁ ts for stage 2 disease 
are more marginal and warrant an individualized approach. The FOLFOX regimen has 
become standard (ﬂ uorouracil, folinic acid and oxaliplatin). Chemotherapy is also 
used in palliation of metastatic disease. Biological therapies: Bevacizumab (anti-
VEGF antibody) improves survival when added to combination therapy in advanced 
disease.   Cetuximab  and  panitumumab  (anti-EGFR  agents)  improve  response  rate 
and survival in KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. 
Prognosis Survival is dependent on age and stage; for stage 1 disease, 5yr survival 
is ~75% but this drops to just 5% with diagnosis at stage 4, hence the imperative for 
eff ective screening (BOX).

_OHCM_10e.indb   616

_OHCM_10e.indb   616

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Right side

Hepatic ﬂexure 3%

Left side
Splenic ﬂexure 2%

617

Ascending colon 7%

 Transverse colon 5%

Descending colon 3%

Caecum 14%

Appendix 1%

Sigmoid colon 20%

Rectum 27%

Anus 2%

Other and unspeciﬁed 9%

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.34  Distribution of colorectal carcinomas. These are averages: black females tend to have 
more proximal neoplasms. White men tend to have more distal neoplasms.

TNM staging in colorectal cancer  
Table 13.13  Colorectal cancer: TNM staging

Tx

Tis

T1

T2

T3

T4

Primary tumour cannot be assessed
Carcinoma in situ
Invading submucosa
Invading muscularis propria
Invading subserosa and beyond (not 
other organs)
Invasion of adjacent structures

Nodes cannot be assessed

Nx
N0 No node spread
N1 Metastases in 1–3 regional nodes
N2 Metastases in >3 regional nodes
M0 No distant spread

M1 Distant metastasis

Reproduced with permission from Edge, SB et al. (Eds.), AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th Edition. 
New York: Springer; 2010.
TNM status used to deﬁ ne overall stage. This is complex with several important 
subtypes, but in essence, stage 1 disease is T1 or T2/N0/M0; stage 2 is T3 or T4/N0/M0; 
stage 3 is characterized by N1 or N2 but still M0; stage 4 is M1. 

Polyps, the challenges of screening, and the NHS
Polyps  are  growths  that  appear  above  the  mucosa  and  can  be  inﬂ ammatory, 
hamartomatous, or neoplastic. Left in situ, polyps carry a risk of malignant trans-
formation that will relate to size and histology (tubular or villous adenomas, esp. 
if >2cm). Patients with polyps may have no symptoms and thus a colonoscopy is 
required to detect and remove. Colonscopy allows the opportunity to detect colo-
rectal cancer at an earlier stage when treatment may be more eff ective.
However,  population-based  colonoscopic  screening  is  costly  and  some  studies 
have suggested that the test does not impact on deaths from right-sided can-
cers which are rarer and harder to detect (ﬁ g 13.34). Therefore, the NHS has intro-
duced a one-off  screening ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy off ered to all people in their 55th 
year. Trial results have shown the incidence of colorectal cancer in the intervention 
(screening) group is reduced by 33% and mortality from colorectal cancer is reduced 
by 43%. Number needed to screen to prevent one diagnosis (=191); or death (=489). 
In parallel, the NHS Bowel Cancer Screening Programme (introduced in 2006) of-
fers colonoscopy to all men and women aged 60–75 who test positive for faecal 
occult  blood  (FOB)  using  a  home  testing  kit  performed  every  2  years.  This  FOB-
stratiﬁ cation  targets  screening  to  those  in  the  highest  risk  groups,  permitting 
detection of more advanced adenomas and early stage cancers. The relative risk 
of death from colorectal cancer in patients undergoing screening is reduced by 
16%. A 11% increase in incidence rates since 2006 for people aged 60–69 is almost 
certainly due to earlier detection through the screening programme. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   617

_OHCM_10e.indb   617

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

618

Carcinoma of the oesophagus

Incidence Australia <5/100 000/yr; UK <9; Iran >100. Risk factors: Diet, alcohol ex-
cess, smoking, achalasia, reﬂ ux oesophagitis ± Barrett’s oesophagus (p695); obesity, 
hot drinks, nitrosamine exposure, Plummer–Vinson syndrome (p250).  :  ≈ 5 : 1.
Site 20% occur in the upper part, 50% in the middle, and 30% in the lower part. 
They may be squamous cell (proximal) or adenocarcinomas (distal; incidence rising).
Presentation Dysphagia; weight; retrosternal chest pain. Signs from the upper 
third of the oesophagus: Hoarseness; cough (may be paroxysmal if aspiration pneu-
monia). : See ‘Dysphagia’, p250.
Tests Oesophagoscopy with biopsy is the investigation of choice ± EUS, CT/MRI for stag-
ing (ﬁ g 13.35), or laparoscopy if signiﬁ cant infra-diaphragmatic component. Staging: 
See table 13.14.
Treatment Survival rates are poor with or without treatment. If localized  T1/T2 
disease, radical curative oesophagectomy may be tried. Pre-op chemotherapy (cis-
platin + ﬂ uorouracil) for localized disease may improve survival, but causes some 
morbidity.  If  surgery  is  not  indicated,  then  chemo radiotherapy  may  be  better  than 
radiotherapy  alone.  Palliation  in  advanced  disease  aims  to  restore  swallowing  with 
chemo/radiotherapy, stenting, and laser use.

TNM staging in oesophageal cancer 
Spread  of  oesophageal  cancer  is  direct,  by  submucosal  inﬁ ltration  and  local 
spread—or to nodes, or, later, via the blood.
Table 13.14  Oesophageal cancer: TNM staging

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Tis

T1

T2

T3

T4

Carcinoma in situ
Invading lamina propria/submucosa
Invading muscularis propria
Invading adventitia
Invasion of adjacent structures

Nx

Nodes cannot be assessed
No node spread

N0
N1–N3 Regional node metastases
No distant spread
Distant metastasis

M0

M1

Reproduced with permission from Edge, SB et al. (Eds.), AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th Edition. 
New York: Springer; 2010.

Fig 13.35  Axial CT of the chest after IV contrast medi-
um showing concentric thickening of the oesophagus 
(arrow); the diagnosis here is oesophageal carcinoma. 
Loss of the fatty plane around the oesophagus sug-
gests local invasion. Anterior to the oesophagus is the 
trachea and next to it is the arch of the aorta.

Image courtesy of Dr Stephen Golding.

_OHCM_10e.indb   618

_OHCM_10e.indb   618

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Carcinoma of the stomach

619

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Incidence of adenocarcinoma at the gastro-oesophageal junction is increasing in the 
West, though incidence of distal and gastric body carcinoma has fallen sharply. It 
remains a tumour notable for its gloomy prognosis and non-speciﬁ c presentation.
Incidence  23/100 000/yr  in  the  UK,  but  there  are  unexplained  wide  geographical 
variations; it is esp ecially common in Japan, as well as Eastern Europe, China, and 
South America.  :  ≈ 2 : 1. Risk factors: Pernicious anaemia, blood group A, H. pylori 
(p252), atrophic gastritis, adenomatous polyps, lower social class, smoking, diet (high 
nitrate, high salt, pickling, low vitamin C), nitrosamine exposure.
Pathology A range of clinical and histological classiﬁ cations are in use. Of note, ‘early’ 
gastric carcinoma (conﬁ ned to mucosa and submucosa) carries a better prognosis 
with endoscopic resection often possible.
Presentation  Symptoms:  Often  non-speciﬁ c.  Dyspepsia  (p59;  age  ≥55yrs  with 
treatment-refractory symptoms demands investigation), weight, vomiting, dyspha-
gia, anaemia. Signs suggesting incurable disease: epigastric mass, hepatomegaly; 
jaundice, ascites (p604); large left supraclavicular (Virchow’s) node (=Troisier’s sign); 
acanthosis nigricans (p562). Most patients in the West present with locally advanced 
(inoperable)  or  metastatic  disease.  Spread  is  local,  lymphatic,  blood-borne,  and 
transcoelomic, eg to ovaries (Krukenberg tumour).
Tests Gastroscopy + multiple ulcer edge biopsies. Aim to biopsy all gastric ul-
cers as even malignant ulcers may appear to heal on drug treatment. Endoscopic 
ultrasound (EUS) can evaluate depth of invasion; CT/MRI helps staging. Staging lapa-
roscopy is recommended for locally advanced tumours. Cytology of peritoneal wash-
ings can help identify peritoneal metastases. 
Treatment See p622 for a description of surgical resections. Early gastric cancers 
may be resectable endoscopically (endoscopic mucosal resection). Partial gastrec-
tomy may suffi  ce for more advanced distal tumours. If proximal, total gast rectomy 
may be needed. Combination chemotherapy (eg epirubicin, cisplatin and ﬂ uorouracil) 
appears to increase survival in advanced disease. If given perioperatively in operable 
disease it improves survival compared to surgery alone. Surgical palliation is often 
needed for obstruction, pain, or haemorrhage. In locally advanced and metastatic 
disease, chemotherapy increases quality of life and survival. Targeted therapies are 
likely to have an increasing role, eg trastuzumab for HER-2-positive tumours.
5yr survival <10% overall, but nearly 20% for patients undergoing radical surgery. 
The prognosis is much better for ‘early’ gastric carcinoma.

Bile duct and gallbladder cancers 
All are rare, have an overall poor prognosis, and are diffi  cult to diagnose. They ac-
count for ~3% of all GI cancers worldwide, but there is geographical variation ( in 
north-east Thailand, Japan, Korea, and Eastern Europe). Most are adenocarcino-
mas. Primary sclerosing cholangitis (p282) is the commonest predisposing factor in 
the West. Presentation: Varies according to location and may include obstructive 
jaundice, pruritus, abdominal pain, weight loss, and anorexia. Investigations: US, CT, 
and ERCP. MRI has a role for determining extent of invasion in bile duct cancers.
Treatment:
  • Bile duct cancer: surgical resection is the only potentially curative treatment 
yet ~80% present with inoperable disease. Palliation includes biliary stenting 
and chemotherapy.

  • Gallbladder cancer: again, radical surgery is the only chance of cure. Patients 
with a calcified (‘porcelain’) gallbladder have an increased risk of cancer—pro-
phylactic surgery should be considered. Palliative treatment of inoperable dis-
ease includes biliary stenting and chemotherapy. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   619

_OHCM_10e.indb   619

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

620

Bowel ischaemia

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

There are three main types of bowel ischaemia: AF with abdominal pain should 
always prompt thoughts of mesenteric ischaemia.
1 Acute mesenteric ischaemia almost always involves the small bowel and may 
follow superior mesenteric artery (SMA; ﬁ g 13.36) thrombosis (~35%) or embolism 
(~35%), mesenteric vein thrombosis (~5%; younger patients with hypercoagulable 
states—tends to aff ect smaller lengths of bowel), or non-occlusive disease (~20%; 
occurs in low-ﬂ ow states and usually reﬂ ects poor cardiac output, though there may 
be other factors such as recent cardiac surgery or renal failure). Other causes include 
trauma, vasculitis (p556), radiotherapy, or strangulation (volvulus or hernia, p612).
Presentation is a classical clinical triad: acute severe abdominal pain; no/minimal 
abdominal signs; rapid hypovolaemiashock. Pain tends to be constant, central, or 
around the RIF. The degree of illness is often far out of proportion with clinical signs.
Tests: There may be Hb (due to plasma loss), WCC, modestly raised plasma am-
ylase, and a persistent metabolic acidosis (high lactate). Early on, the abdominal 
x-ray shows a ‘gasless’ abdomen. CT/MR may show evidence of ischaemia with CT/MR 
angiography or formal arteriography if doubt remains. Often the diganosis is made 
on ﬁ nding a nasty, necrotic bowel at laparotomy.
Treatment: The main life-threatening complications secondary to acute mesenteric 
ischaemia are 1 septic peritonitis and 2 progression of a systemic inﬂ ammatory re-
sponse syndrome (SIRS) to multi-organ failure, mediated by bacterial translocation 
across the dying gut wall. Resuscitation with ﬂ uid, antibiotics (eg piperacillin/tazo-
bactam, see table 9.3, p386), and, usually, LMWH/heparin are required. If arteriogra-
phy is done, thrombolytics may be infused locally via the catheter. At surgery, dead 
bowel must be removed. Revascularization may be attempted on potentially viable 
bowel but it is a diffi  cult process and often needs a 2nd laparotomy.
Prognosis: Poor for arterial thrombosis and non-occlusive disease (<40% survive), 
though not so bad for venous and embolic ischaemia.
2 Chronic mesenteric ischaemia (AKA intestinal angina.) The triad of severe, colicky 
post-prandial abdominal pain (‘gut claudication’), weight (eating hurts), and an up-
per abdominal bruit may be present ± PR bleeding, malabsoprtion, and N&V. Typically 
brought about through a combination of a low-ﬂ ow state with atheroma (95% due to 
diff use atherosclerotic disease in all three mesenteric arteries). It is rare and diffi  cult 
to diagnose. Tests: CT angiography and contrast-enhanced MR angiography are replac-
ing traditional angiography. Treatment: Once diagnosis is conﬁ rmed, surgery should 
be considered due to the ongoing risk of acute infarction. Percutaneous transluminal 
angioplasty and stent insertion has replaced open revascularization. It is associated 
with less post-operative morbidity and mortality, but has higher restenosis rates.
3 Chronic colonic ischaemia (AKA ischaemic colitis) usually follows low ﬂ ow in the 
inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) territory and ranges from mild ischaemia to gan-
grenous colitis. Presentation: Lower left-sided abdominal pain ± bloody diarrhoea. 
Tests: CT may be helpful but lower GI endoscopy is ‘gold-standard’. Treatment: Usu-
ally conservative with ﬂ uid replacement and antibiotics. Most recover but subse-
quent development of ischaemic strictures is common. Gangrenous ischaemic colitis 
(presenting with peritonitis and hypovolaemic shock) requires prompt resuscitation 
followed by resection of the aff ected bowel and stoma formation. Mortality is high.

_OHCM_10e.indb   620

_OHCM_10e.indb   620

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

621

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.36  The arterial supply to the colon.

_OHCM_10e.indb   621

_OHCM_10e.indb   621

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

622

Gastric surgery and its aftermath

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Indications  for  gastric  surgery  include  gastric  cancer  (p619)  and  perforated/
haemorrhaging peptic ulcers. Medical therapy (p252) for peptic ulcers has made 
elective surgery exceedingly rare/redundant. Emergency surgery may be needed 
for haemorrhage or perforation. Haemor rhage is usually treated by under-running 
the bleeding ulcer base or excision of the ulcer. If the former is done, then a biopsy 
should be taken to exclude malignancy. Perforation is usually managed by excision 
of the hole for histology, then closure.
Gastric carcinoma Localized disease may be treated by curative gastrectomy. Le-
sions in the proximal third or extensive inﬁ ltrative disease require total gastrectomy, 
while lesions in the distal two-thirds can be treated with a partial gastrectomy. Lapa-
roscopic surgery may be as eff ective and safe as open surgery in specialist centres. 
Surgery: Billroth I: Partial gastrectomy with simple gastroduodenal re-anastomosis.
Billroth II (AKA Polya) gastrectomy: (ﬁ g 13.37) Partial gastrectomy with gastroje-
junal anastomosis. The duodenal stump is oversewn (leaving a blind aff erent loop), 
and anastomosis is achieved by a longitud inal incision into the proximal jejunum. 
Roux-en-Y: (ﬁ g 13.38) Following total or subtotal gastrectomy, the proximal duodenal 
stump is oversewn, the proximal jejunum is divided from the distal duodenum and con-
nects with the oesophagus (or proximal stomach after subtotal gastrectomy), while 
the distal duodenum is connected to the distal jejunum.
Lymph node clearance is a controversial area. RCTS and meta-analyses suggest there 
may be limited beneﬁ t and increased morbidity associated with extended lymph 
node resections (D2 or D3) over resection limited to the perigastric nodes (D1).
Physical complications of gastrectomy
  • Abdominal  fullness:  Feeling  of  early  satiety  (±  discomfort  and  distension)  im-

proving with time. Advise to take small, frequent meals.

  • Afferent  loop  syndrome:  Post-gastrectomy  (eg  Billroth  II),  the  aff erent  loop 
may ﬁ ll with bile after a meal, causing upper abdominal pain and bilious vomit-
ing. This is diffi  cult to treat—but often improves with time.

  • Diarrhoea: May be disabling after vagotomy. Codeine phosphate may help.
  • Gastric tumour: A rare complication of any surgery which  acid production.
  • Amylase:  If  with  abdominal  pain,  this  may  indicate  aff erent  loop  obstruction 

after Billroth II surgery and requires emergency surgery.

Metabolic complications
  • Dumping syndrome: Fainting and sweating after eating due to food of high os-
motic potential being dumped in the jejunum, causing oligaemia from rapid ﬂ uid 
shifts.  ‘Late  dumping’  is  due  to  rebound  hypoglycaemia  and  occurs  1–3h  after 
meals. Both tend to improve with time but may be helped by eating less sugar, 
and more guar gum and pectin (slows glucose absorption). Acarbose may also 
help to reduce the early hyperglycaemic stimulus to insulin secretion.

  • Weight loss: Often due to poor calorie intake.
  • Bacterial overgrowth ± malabsorption (blind loop syndrome) may occur.
  • Anaemia: Usually from lack of iron, hypochlorhydria, and stomach resection. B12 

levels are frequently low but megaloblastic anaemia is rare.

  • Osteomalacia: There may be pseudofractures which look like metastases.

_OHCM_10e.indb   622

_OHCM_10e.indb   622

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

623

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Oesophagus
Stomach
Bile duct
Duodenum

Bile

Gastrojejunostomy
(stomach joined
to jejunum)
Jejunum

Fig 13.37  Billroth II.

Fig 13.38  The Roux-en-Y reconstruction.

Theodor Billroth
Theodor Billroth was a surgeon of German-Austrian origin, whose name lives on 
as a set of operations on the stomach. He was a pioneer of abdominal surgery and 
the use of aseptic techniques, performing the ﬁ rst Billroth I procedure in 1881 for 
the resection of a pyloric gastric carcinoma. Among the many of his remarkable 
achievements is included the ﬁ rst laryngectomy. He was also a talented musician (a 
close friend of Brahms) and a dedicated educator with something of a realist’s view 
of the world:
‘The pleasure of a physician is little, the gratitude of patients is rare, and even 
rarer is material reward, but these things will never deter the student who feels 
Theodor Billroth (1829–94).
the call within him.’ 

_OHCM_10e.indb   623

_OHCM_10e.indb   623

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

624

Fundoplication for gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Laparoscopic fundoplication is the surgical procedure of choice when symptoms of 
GORD are refractory to medical therapy and there is severe reﬂ ux (conﬁ rmed by pH-
monitoring)—see p254. Symptoms may be complicated by a hiatus hernia, which is 
repaired during the procedure.
Surgery The defect in the diaphragm is repaired by tightening the crura. Reﬂ ux is 
prevented by wrapping the gastric fundus around the lower oesophageal sphinc-
ter—see  ﬁ g  13.39.  There  are  various  types  of  procedure,  eg  Nissen  (360°  wrap), 
Toupet (270° posterior wrap), Watson (anterior hemifundoplication). Laparoscopic 
surgery is at least as eff ective at controlling reﬂ ux as open surgery but with a lower 
mortality and morbidity. Wound infections and respiratory complications are also 
more common in open surgery, though the incidence of dysphagia is similar for the 
two procedures—but see p592.
Complications Dysphagia (if the wrap is too tight), ‘gas-bloat syndrome’ (inability 
to belch/vomit), and new-onset diarrhoea. 

Diaphragm

Oesophagus

Tightened
hiatus

Stomach

Lower 
oesophageal 
sphincter

The gastric fundus
is wrapped around
the lower
oesophageal
sphincter

Fig 13.39  Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication.

Oesophageal rupture

Surgical instrument

Oesophagus

Oesophagus

Stomach

Lower oesophageal 
sphincter

Causes •Iatrogenic, eg endoscopy/biopsy/dilatation (accounts for 85–90% of per-
forations). •Trauma, eg penetrating injury/ingestion of foreign body. •Carcinoma 
•Boerhaave syndrome—rupture due to violent vomiting. •Corrosive ingestion.
Clinical features Odynophagia, tachypnoea, dyspnoea, fever, shock, surgical em-
physema (a crackling sensation felt on palpating the skin over the chest or neck 
caused by air tracking from the lungs.  : Pneumothorax).
 Iatrogenic perforations are less prone to mediastinitis and sepsis and may be man-
aged conservatively with NG tube, PPI, and antibiotics. Others require resuscitation, 
PPI, antibiotics, antifungals, and surgery (debridement of mediastinum and place-
ment of  T-tube for drainage and formation of a controlled oesophago-cutaneous 
ﬁ stula).

_OHCM_10e.indb   624

_OHCM_10e.indb   624

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

625

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   625

_OHCM_10e.indb   625

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

626

Surgical management of obesity

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Severe obesity is increasing in prevalence worldwide and is associated with type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM); hypertension; ischaemic heart disease; sleep apnoea; osteo-
arthritis; and depression. Bariatric surgery has become very successful at weight 
reduction, symptom improvement, and improving quality of life. Surgery increases 
life expectancy by around 3 years (but may not prolong survival in high-risk men). 
Indications: According to NICE guidelines,9 weight-loss surgery in adults should be 
considered if all the following criteria are met:

1      BMI ≥40 (or ≥35 with signiﬁ cant comorbidities that could improve with weight).
2      Failure of non-surgical management to achieve and maintain clinically beneﬁ cial 

weight loss for 6 months.

3      Fitness for surgery and anaesthesia.
4      Intensive management in tier 3 service (provides guidance on diet, physical ac-

tivity, and psychosocial concerns, as well as lifelong medical monitoring).

5      The patient must be well informed and motivated.

If BMI ≥50, or in newly diagnosed T2DM with BMI ≥30, surgery is recommended as 
ﬁ rst-line treatment.
Comparison with medical therapy Surgery is more eff ective in achieving weight 
loss than non-surgical management and weight loss is more likely to be maintained 
in the longer term. Adverse events are more common following surgery, and vary 
from one procedure to another.
Procedures There are two main mechanisms causing weight loss: 1 Restriction of 
calorie intake by reducing stomach capacity. 2 Malabsorption of nutrients by reduc-
ing the length of functional small bowel. NB: This also aff ects the levels of circulating 
gut peptides (eg PYY and GLP-1), which are thought to play a role in the mechanism of 
satiety and weight loss. Choose surgical intervention jointly with patient:
  • Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB): This restrictive technique creates a 
pre-stomach pouch by placing a silicone band around the top of the stomach, which 
serves as a new smaller stomach. The band can be adjusted by addition or removal of 
saline through a subcutaneous port (see ﬁ g 13.40). LAGB is associated with improve-
ments in comorbidities and quality of life. Weight loss is slower and less than with 
gastric bypass but there is lower mortality and fewer complications. Relatively non-
invasive and band removal possible. Complications: pouch enlargement, band slip, 
band erosion, and port infection/breakage.

  • Sleeve gastrectomy: (ﬁ g 13.41) Involves division of the stomach vertically, reduc-
ing it in size by about 75%. The pyloric valve at the bottom of the stomach is left 
intact  so  function  and  digestion  are  unaltered.  The  procedure  is  not  reversible 
and may be a ﬁ rst stage for progression to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass or duodenal 
switch in very obese patients where a single-stage procedure would be technically 
diffi  cult or unsafe.

  • Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: (ﬁ g 13.42) Laparoscopic or open. A portion of the jeju-
num is attached to a small stomach pouch to allow food to bypass the distal stom-
ach, duodenum, and proximal jejunum. It can be performed laparoscopically and 
works by both restriction and malabsorption. Mean excess weight loss at 5 years 
is 62.8%. Current evidence demonstrates greater weight loss, greater resolution of 
comorbidities, and lower reoperation rates compared to LAGB. Complications: mi-
cronutrient deﬁ ciency (requires vitamin supplementation and lifelong follow-up/
blood tests), dumping syndrome, wound infection, hernias, malabsorption, diar-
rhoea, and a mortality of <0.5% (at experienced centres). 

_OHCM_10e.indb   626

_OHCM_10e.indb   626

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Oesophagus

Pouch
Adjustable band
Duodenum

Subcutaneous
access port
Fig 13.40  Adjustable gastric band.

Gastric
“sleeve”

Pylorus

627

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Excised
stomach

Fig 13.41  Vertical sleeve gastrectomy.

Fig 13.42  Gastric bypass.

_OHCM_10e.indb   627

_OHCM_10e.indb   627

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

628

Diverticular disease

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

A  GI  diverticulum  is  an  outpouching  of  the  gut  wall,  usually  at  sites  of  entry  of 
perforating arteries. Diverticulosis means that diverticula are present, and diver-
ticular disease implies they are symptomatic. Diverticulitis refers to inﬂ ammation 
of a diverticulum. Diverticula can be aquired or congenital and may occur elsewhere, 
but the most important are acquired colonic diverticula, to which this page refers.
Pathology Most within sigmoid colon with 95% of complications at this site, but 
right-sided  and  massive  single  diverticula  can  occur.  High  intraluminal  pressures 
(due, perhaps, to lack of dietary ﬁ bre) force the mucosa to herniate through the 
muscle layers of the gut at weak points adjacent to penetrating vessels. 30% of 
Westerners have diverticulosis by age 60. The majority are asymptomatic.
Diagnosis Diverticula are a common incidental ﬁ nding at colonoscopy (ﬁ g 6.11, p249). 
CT abdomen is best to conﬁ rm acute diverticulitis and can identify extent of disease 
and any complications (eg colovesical ﬁ stulae). Colonoscopy risk perforation in acute 
setting. AXR may identify obstruction or free air (perforation).
Diverticular disease Altered bowel habit ± left-sided colic relieved by defecation; 
nausea and ﬂ atulence. High-ﬁ bre diets do not help symptoms; try antispasmodics, 
eg mebeverine 135mg/8h PO. Surgical resection occasionally resorted to.
Diverticulitis features above + pyrexia, WCC, CRP/ESR, a tender colon ± localized or 
generalized peritonism. Mild attacks can be treated at home with bowel rest (ﬂ uids 
only) ± antibiotics. If ﬂ uids and pain not tolerated, admit for analgesia, NBM, IV ﬂ uids 
and IV antibiotics. Most attacks settle but complications include abscess formation 
(neces sitating percutaneous CT-guided drainage), or perforation. Beware diverticu-
litis in immunocompromised patients (eg on steroids) who often have few symptoms 
and may present late.
Surgery The need for surgery is reﬂ ected by the degree of infective complications:
Stage 1
Stage 2 Walled off  or pelvic abscess
Stage 3
Stage 4
Indications for elective surgery include stenosis, ﬁ stulae, or recurrent bleeding.
Complications Perforation: There is ileus, peritonitis ± shock. Mortality: 40%. 
Manage as for an acute abdomen. At laparotomy a Hartmann’s procedure may be 
performed (p582). Primary anastomosis is possible in selected patients. Emergency 
laparoscopic management is an emerging alternative. 
  • Haemorrhage is usually sudden and painless. It is a common cause of big rectal 
bleeds (p629). Embolization (at angiography) or colonic resection only necessary 
if ongoing massive bleeding and colonoscopic haemostasis has been unsuccessful.
  • Fistulae: Enterocolic, colovaginal, or colovesical (pneumaturia ± intractable UTIS). 

Surgery rarely needed
May resolve without surgery
Surgery required
Surgery required

Generalized purulent peritonitis
Generalized faecal peritonitis

Pericolic or mesenteric abscess

Treatment is surgical, eg colonic resection.

  • Abscesses, eg with swinging fever, leucocytosis, and localizing signs, eg boggy 
rectal mass (pelvic abscess—drain rectally). If no localizing signs, remember the 
aphorism:  pus  somewhere,  pus  nowhere = pus  under  the  diaphragm.  A  sub-
phrenic abscess is a horrible way to die, so do an urgent ultrasound. Antibiotics ± 
ultrasound/CT-guided drainage may be needed.

  • Post-infective strictures may form in the sigmoid colon.

_OHCM_10e.indb   628

_OHCM_10e.indb   628

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

629

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Rectal bleeding—an acute management plan
Causes Diverticulitis, colorectal cancer, haemorrhoids, IBD, perianal disease, an-
giodyplasia (submucosal arteriovenous malformations, typically elderly). Rarities: 
trauma, ischaemia colitis, radiation proctitis, aorto-enteric ﬁ stula.
An acute man agement plan for this common surgical event:
 ABC resuscitation, if necessary.
 History and examination.
 Blood tests:  FBC,  U&E,  LFT, clotting, amyl ase (always thinking of pancreatitis), 
CRP, group and save—await Hb result before crossmatching unless unstable and 
bleeding.

 Imaging: May only need plain AXR, but if there are signs of perforation (eg sepsis, 
peritonism) or if there is cardiorespiratory comorbidity, then request an erect CXR.
 Fluid management: Insert 2 cannulae (≥18G) into the antecubital fossae. Insert 
a urinary catheter if there is a suspicion of haemodynamic comprom ise—there 
is no absolute indication, but remember that you are weighing up the risks and 
beneﬁ ts. Give crystalloid as replacement and maintenance IVI. Blood transfu-
sion only if signiﬁ cant blood loss (table 13.10, p607).

 Clotting: Withold ± reverse anticoagulation and antiplatelet agents (p351).
 Antibiotics may occasionally be required if there is evidence of sepsis or perfo-

ration, eg piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5g/8h IV.

 Keep bedbound: The patient may feel the need to get out of bed to pass stool, 
but this could be another large bleed, resulting in collapse if they try to walk. 
Don’t allow them to mobilize and inform the nursing staff  of this.

 Start a stool chart to monitor volume and frequency of motions. Send a sample 

for MC&S (x3 if known to have compromising comorbidity such as IBD).

 Diet: Keep on clear ﬂ uids so that they can have something, yet the colon will be 

as clear as possible if colonoscopy required.

 Interventions  if bleeding not settling with conservative management: Angi-
ography may allow localization of bleeding (eg sigmoid diverticulum or right 
sided angiodysplasia) as well as therapeutic embolization;  CT angiography  is 
a non-invasive alternative (without interventional options); colonoscopy  may 
permit endoscopic haemostasis.

 Surgery: The main indication for this is unremitting, massive bleeding that is not 

controlled by other means.

_OHCM_10e.indb   629

_OHCM_10e.indb   629

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

630

Perianal problems

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Pruritus ani Itch occurs if the anus is moist/soiled; ﬁ ssures, incontinence, poor hy-
giene, tight pants, threadworm, ﬁ stula, dermatoses, lichen sclerosis, anxiety, contact 
dermatitis (perfumed goods). Cause is often unknown. : Avoid scratching, perianal 
hygiene, avoid foods which loosen stools. Soothing ointment, mild topical corticos-
teroid if perinanal inﬂ ammation (max 2wks), oral antihistamine for noctural itch.
Fissure-in-ano Painful tear in the squamous lining of the lower anal canal—often, if 
chronic, with a ‘sentinel pile’ or mucosal tag at the external aspect. 90% are posterior 
(anterior ones follow parturition). >. Causes: Most are due to hard faeces. Spasm 
may constrict the inferior rectal artery, causing ischaemia, making healing diffi  cult 
and  perpetuating  the  problem.  Rare  causes  (multiple  ±  lateral):  syphilis;  herpes; 
trauma; Crohn’s; anal cancer; psoriasis. Groin nodes suggest a complicating factor 
(eg immunosuppression/HIV). : 5% lidocaine ointment + GTN ointment (0.2–0.4%) or 
topical diltiazem (2%) ; dietary ﬁ bre, ﬂ uids, stool softener, and hygiene advice. Botu-
linum toxin injection (2nd line) and topical diltiazem (2%) are at least as eff ective as 
GTN with fewer side-eff ects. If conservative measures fail, surgical options include 
lateral partial internal sphincterotomy. 
Fistula-in-ano  A  track  communicates  between  the  skin  and  anal  canal/rectum. 
Blockage of deep intramuscular gland ducts is thought to predispose to the forma-
tion of abscesses, which discharge to form the ﬁ stula. Goodsall’s rule determines 
the path of the ﬁ stula track: if anterior, the track is in a straight line (radial); if poste-
rior, the internal opening is always at the 6 o’clock position, taking a tortuous course. 
Causes: perianal sepsis, abscesses (see later in topic), Crohn’s disease, TB, diverticu-
lar disease, rectal carcinoma, immunocompromise. Tests: MRI; endoanal US scan. : 
Fistulot omy + excision. High ﬁ stulae (involving continence muscles of anus) require 
‘seton suture’ tightened over time to maintain continence; low ﬁ stulae are ‘laid open’ 
to heal by secondary intention—division of sphincters poses no risk to continence.
Anorectal abscesses Usually caused by gut organisms (rarely staphs or TB). :≈1:8. 
Perianal  (~45%),  ischiorectal  (≤30%),  intersphincteric  (>20%),  supralevator  (~5%) 
(ﬁ g 13.43). : Incise & drain under GA. Associations: DM, Crohn’s, malignancy, ﬁ stulae.
Perianal haematoma (AKA thrombosed external pile—see p633). Strictly, it is actu-
ally a clotted venous saccule. It appears as a 2–4mm ‘dark blueberry’ under the skin 
at the anal margin. It may be evacuated under LA or left to resolve spontaneously.
Pilonidal sinus Obstruction of natal cleft hair follicles ~6cm above the anus. In-
growing of hair excites a foreign body reaction and may cause secondary tracks to 
open laterally ± abscesses, with foul-smelling discharge. (Barbers get these between 
ﬁ ngers.) :≈10:1. Obese Caucasians and those from Asia, the Middle East, and 
Mediterranean at risk. : Excision of the sinus tract ± primary closure. Consider pre-
op antibiotics. Complex tracks can be laid open and packed individually, or skin ﬂ aps 
can be used to cover the defect. Off er hygiene and hair removal advice.
Rectal prolapse The mucosa (partial/type 1), or all layers (complete/type 2—more 
common), may protrude through the anus. Incontinence in 75%. It is due to a lax 
sphincter, prolonged straining, and related to chronic neurological and psychological 
disorders. : Abdominal approach: ﬁ x rectum to sacrum (rectopexy) ± mesh inser-
tion ± rectosigmoidectomy. Laparoscopic rectoplexy is as eff ective as open repair. 
Perineal  approach: Delorme’s procedure (resect close to dentate line and suture 
mucosal boundaries), anal encirclement with a Thiersch wire.
Perianal warts Condylomata acuminata (viral warts) are treated with podophyllo-
toxin or imiquimod or cryotherapy/surgical excision. Giant condylomata acuminata 
of Buschke & Loewenstein may evolve into verrucous cancers (low-grade, non-me-
tastasizing). Condylomata lata secondary to syphilis is treated with penicillin.
Proctalgia  fugax  Idiopathic,  intense,  brief,  stabbing/crampy  rectal  pain,  often 
worse at night. The mainstay of treatment is reassurance. Inhaled salbutamol or 
topical GTN (0.2–0.4%) or topical diltiazem (2%) may help. 
Anal ulcers Consider Crohn’s, anal cancer, lymphogranuloma venerum, TB, syphilis.
Skin tags Seldom cause trouble but are easily excised.

_OHCM_10e.indb   630

_OHCM_10e.indb   630

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Anal cancer
Incidence: 1233 new cases of anal cancer in the UK (2013). Risk factors: Anorec eptive 
intercourse; HPV (HPV 16 associated with worse prognosis); HIV. Histology: Squamous 
cell (85%); rarely basaloid, melanoma, or adenocarcinoma. Anal margin tumours 
are usually well-diff erentiated, keratinizing lesions with a good prognosis. Anal ca-
nal tumours arise above dentate line, are poorly diff erentiated and non-keratinizing 
with a poorer prognosis. Spread: Tumours above the dentate line spread to pelvic 
lymph nodes; those below spread to the inguinal nodes. Presentation: Bleeding, 
pain, bowel habit change, pruritus ani, masses, stricture. : Perianal warts; leu-
coplakia;  lichen  sclerosis;  Bowen’s  disease;  Crohn’s  disease.  Treatment:  Chemo-
irradiation (radiotherapy + ﬂ uorouracil + mitomycin/cisplatin) is usually prefer red 
to ano rectal excision & colostomy; 75% retain normal anal function.

631

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.43  Anatomy of the anal canal. Perianal abscesses present as 
tender, inﬂ amed, localized swellings at the anal verge. Ischiorectal 
absces ses are also tender but cause a diff use, indurated swelling in 
the  ischioanal  fossa  area.  You  will  ﬁ nd  your  patient  waiting  anx-
iously  for  you,  pac ing  about,  or  on  the  edge  of  their  chair:  avoid-
ing all pressure is imperative. NB: above the dentate line = visceral 
nerve innervation (hence no pain sensation); below = somatic inner-
vation (very sensitive to pain).

_OHCM_10e.indb   631

_OHCM_10e.indb   631

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

632

Haemorrhoids (piles)

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Deﬁ nition Haemorrhoids (≈running blood in Greek) are disrupted and dilated anal 
cushions. The anus is lined mainly by discontinuous masses of spongy vascular tis-
sue—the anal cushions, which contribute to anal closure. Viewed from the lithotomy 
position, the three anal cushions are at 3, 7, and 11 o’clock (where the three major 
arteries that feed the vascular plexuses enter the anal canal). They are attached 
by  smooth  muscle  and  elastic  tissue,  but  are  prone  to  displacement  and  disrup-
tion, either singly or together. The eff ects of gravity (standing), increased anal tone 
(?stress), and the eff ects of straining at stool may make them become both bulky 
and loose, and so to protrude to form piles (Latin pila, meaning a ball). They are 
vulnerable to trauma (eg from hard stools) and bleed readily from the capillaries 
(bright red blood) of the underlying lamina propria. NB: piles are not varicose veins.

As there are no sensory ﬁ bres above the dentate line (squamomucosal junction), 
piles are not painful unless they thrombose when they protrude and are gripped by 
the anal sphincter, blocking venous return. See ﬁ g 13.44.
Diff erential diagnosis Perianal haematoma; anal ﬁ ssure; abscess; tumour; proctalgia 
fugax. Never ascribe rectal bleeding to piles without examination or investigation.
Causes Constipation with prolonged straining is a key factor. In many the bowel 
habit may be normal. Congestion from a pelvic tumour, pregnancy, CCF, or portal 
hypertension are important in only a minority of cases. Elicit red ﬂ ags in history.
Pathogenesis There is a vicious circle: vascular cushions protrude through a tight 
anus,  become  more  congested,  and  hypertrophy  to  protrude  again  more  readily. 
These protrusions may then strangulate. See table 13.15 for classiﬁ cation.
Symptoms Bright red rectal bleeding, often coating stools, on the tissue, or drip-
ping into the pan after defecation. There may be mucous discharge and pruritus ani. 
Severe anaemia may occur. Symptoms such as weight loss, tenesmus, and change in 
bowel habit should prompt thoughts of other pathology. In all rectal bleeding do:
  • An abdominal examination to rule out other diseases.
  • PR exam: prolapsing piles are obvious. Internal haemorrhoids are not palpable.
  • Colonoscopy/ﬂ exible sigmoidoscopy to exclude proximal pathology if 50 years old.
Treatment  1 Medical: (1st-degree.) Fluid and fibre is key ± topical analgesics & 
stool softener (bulk forming). Topical steroids for short periods only.
2 Non-operative: (2nd & 3rd degree, or 1st degree if medical therapy failed.) •Rubber 
band ligation. Cheap, but needs skill. Banding produces an ulcer to anchor the mu-
cosa (SE: bleeding, infection; pain). It has the lowest recurrence rate. •Sclerosants. 
(1st- or 2nd-degree.) 2mL of 5% phenol in oil is injected into the pile above the den-
tate line, inducing ﬁ brotic reaction. Recurrence higher (SE: impotence; prostatitis). 
•Infra-red coagulation. Applied to localized areas of piles, it works by coagulating 
vessels and tethering mucosa to subcutaneous tissue. It is as successful as banding 
and may be less painful. •Bipolar diathermy and direct current electrotherapy. 
Causes coagulation and ﬁ brosis after local application of heat. Success rates are simi-
lar to those of infrared coagulation, and complication rates are low.
3 Surgery: •Excisional haemor rhoid ectomy is the most eff ective treatment (excision 
of piles ± ligation of vascular pedicles, as day-case surgery, needing ~2wks off  work). 
Scalpel, electrocautery, or laser may be used. •Stapled haemorrhoidopexy (procedure 
for prolapsing haemorrhoids) may result in less pain, a shorter hospital stay, and quick-
er return to normal activity than conventional surgery. It is used when there is a large 
internal component, but has a higher recurrence and prolapse rate than excisional. 
Surgical complications  include constipation; infection; stricture; bleeding.
Prolapsed, thrombosed piles Analgesia, ice packs, and stool softeners. Pain usu-
ally resolves in 2–3wks. Some advocate early surgery. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   632

_OHCM_10e.indb   632

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Table 13.15  Classiﬁ cation of haemorrhoids
1st degree
Remain in the rectum
2nd degree
Prolapse through the anus on defecation but spontaneously reduce
3rd degree
As for 2nd-degree but require digital reduction
4th degree
Remain persistently prolapsed

633

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.44  Internal and external haemorrhoids. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   633

_OHCM_10e.indb   633

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

634

Gallstones

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Bile contains cholesterol, bile pigments (from broken down Hb), and phospholipids. 
If the concentrations vary, diff erent stones may form. Pigment stones: Small, fri-
able, and irregular. Causes: haemolysis. Cholesterol  stones: Large, often solitary. 
Causes: , age, obesity (Admirand’s triangle: risk of stone if lecithin, bile salts, 
cholesterol). Mixed stones: Faceted (calcium salts, pigment, and cholesterol). Gall-
stone prevalence: 8% of those over 40yrs. 90% remain asymptomatic. Risk factors 
for stones becoming symptomatic: smoking; parity.
Biliary colic Gallstones are symptomatic with cystic duct obstruction or if passed 
into the common bile duct (CBD10). RUQ pain (radiates  back) ± jaundice. : Analgesia 
(see p636), rehydrate, NBM. Elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy (see BOX ‘Early or 
delayed cholecystectomy?’). Do urinalysis, CXR, and ECG.
Acute cholecystitis follows stone or sludge impaction in the neck of the gallblad-
der (GB10), which may cause continuous epigastric or RUQ pain (referred to the right 
shoulder—see p609), vomiting, fever, local peritonism, or a GB mass. The main dif-
ference from biliary colic is the inﬂ ammatory component (local peritonism, fever, 
WCC; see table 13.16). If the stone moves to the CBD, obstructive jaundice and cholan-
gitis may occur—see BOX ‘Complications of gallstones’. Murphy’s sign: lay 2 ﬁ ngers 
over the RUQ; ask patient to breathe in. This causes pain & arrest of inspiration as 
an inﬂ amed GB impinges on your ﬁ ngers. It is only +ve if the same test in the LUQ 
does not cause pain. A phlegmon  (RUQ mass of inﬂ amed adherent omentum and 
bowel) may be palpable. Tests: WCC, US—a thick-walled, shrunken GB (also seen in 
chronic disease), peri cholecystic ﬂ uid, stones, CBD (dilated if >6mm). Plain AXR only 
shows ~10% of gallstones; it may identify a ‘porcelain’ GB (associated risk of cancer). 
Treatment: NBM, pain relief, IVI, and antibiotics, eg co-amoxiclav 625mg/8h IV. Lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for all patients ﬁ t for GA. Open 
surgery is required if there is GB perforation. If elderly or high risk/unsuit able for 
surgery, consi der percutaneous cholecystostomy; cholecystectomy can still be done 
later. Cholecystostomy is also the preferred treatment for acalculous cholecystitis.
Chronic cholecystitis Chronic inﬂ ammation ± colic. ‘Flatulent dyspepsia’: vague 
abdom inal discomfort, distension, nausea, ﬂ atulence, and fat intolerance (fat stimu-
lates cholecystokinin release and GB contraction). US to image stones and assess CBD 
diameter. MRCP (p742) is used to ﬁ nd CBD stones. : Chole cystectomy. If US shows a di-
lated CBD with stones, ERCP (p742) + sphincterotomy before surgery. If symptoms per-
sist post-surgery consider hiatus hernia/IBS/peptic ulcer/chronic pancreatitis/tumour.
Other presentations
  • Obstructive  jaundice  with  CBD  stones:  (See  p272.) If  LFT  worsening,  ERCP with 
sphincterotomy ± biliary trawl, then cholecystectomy may be needed, or open sur-
gery with CBD exploration. If CBD stones are suspected pre-operatively, they should 
be identiﬁ ed by MRCP (p742).

  • Cholangitis: (Bile duct infection.) Causing RUQ pain, jaundice, and rigors (Charcot’s 
triad,  BOX  ‘Complications  of  gallstones’).  Treat  with,  eg  piperacillin/tazobactam 
4.5g/8h IV.

  • Gallstone ileus: A stone erodes through the GB into the duodenum; it may then 
obstruct the terminal ileum. AXR shows: air in CBD (= pneumobilia), small bowel ﬂ uid 
levels, and a stone. Duodenal obstruction is rarer (Bouveret’s syndrome).

  • Pancreatitis: See p636.
  • Mucocoele/empyema: Obstructed GB ﬁ lls with mucus (secreted by GB wall)/pus.
  • Silent stones: Do elective surgery on those with sickle cell, immunosuppression, 

(debatably diabetes) as well as all calciﬁ ed/porcelain GBS.

  • Mirizzi’s syndrome: A stone in the GB presses on the bile duct causing jaundice.
  • Gallbladder necrosis: Rare because of dual blood supply (hepatic artery via cystic 

artery, and from small branches of the hepatic artery in the GB fossa).

  • Other: Causes of cholecystitis and biliary symptoms other than gallstones are rare. 
Consider  infection  (typhoid,  cryptosporidiosis,  and  brucellosis);  cholecystokinin 
release; parenteral nutrition; anatomical abnormality; polyarteritis nodosa (p556).

10  Common abbreviations used in this section: CBD, common bile duct; GB, gallbladder.

_OHCM_10e.indb   634

_OHCM_10e.indb   634

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

635

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Complications of gallstones
In the gallbladder & cystic duct:
  • Biliary colic
  • Acute and chronic cholecystitis
  • Mucocoele
  • Empyema
  • Carcinoma
  • Mirizzi’s syndrome.

In the bile ducts:
  • Obstructive jaundice
  • Cholangitis
  • Pancreatitis.
In the gut:
  • Gallstone ileus.

Table 13.16  Biliary colic, cholecystitis, or cholangitis?

Biliary colic
Acute cholecystitis
Cholangitis

RUQ pain




Fever / WCC
X



Jaundice
X
X


Early or delayed cholecystectomy?
For acute cholecystitis Laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis 
has traditionally been performed 6–12wks after the acute episode due to antici-
pated increased mortality and conversion to open procedure. Early laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy, within 7d of symptom onset, is now the treatment of choice. 
Early surgery reduces the duration of hospital admission compared with delayed 
surgery,  but  does  not  reduce  mortality  or  complications.  Up  to  one-quarter  of 
people scheduled for delayed surgery may require urgent operations because of 
recurrent or worsening symptoms.10
For biliary colic Patients with biliary colic due to gallstones waiting for an elec-
tive laparoscopic cholecystectomy may develop signiﬁ cant complications, such 
as acute pancreatitis (p636) during the waiting period. One high-bias trial found 
early laparoscopic cholecystectomy (within 24h of an acute episode) decreased 
potential complications that may develop during the wait for elective surgery. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   635

_OHCM_10e.indb   635

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

636

Acute pancreatitis

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

This unpredictable disease (mortality ~12%) is characterized by self-perpetuating 
pancreatic enzyme-mediated autodigestion; oedema and ﬂ uid shifts cause hypovol-
aemia, as extracellular ﬂ uid is trapped in the gut, peritoneum, and retroperitoneum 
(worsened by vomiting). Although pancreatitis is mild in 80% of cases; 20% develop 
severe complicated and life-threatening disease: progression may be rapid from mild 
oedema to necrotizing pancreatitis. ~50% of cases that advance to necrosis are fur-
ther complicated by infection.
Causes The one mnemonic we can all agree on: ‘GET SMASHED‘. Gallstones (~35%), 
Ethanol  (~35%),  Trauma  (~1.5%),  Steroids,  Mumps,  Autoimmune  (PAN),  Scorpion 
venom,  Hyperlipidaemia,  hypothermia,  hypercalcaemia,  ERCP  (~5%)  and  emboli, 
Drugs. Also pregnancy and neoplasia or no cause found (~10–30%).
Symptoms Gradual or sudden severe epigastric or central abdominal pain (radiates 
to back, sitting forward may relieve); vomiting prominent.
Signs May be subtle in serious disease. HR, fever, jaundice, shock, ileus, rigid abdo-
men ± local/general tenderness, periumbilical bruising (Cullen’s sign) or ﬂ anks (Grey 
Turner’s sign) from blood vessel autodigestion and retroperitoneal haemorrhage.
Tests Raised serum amylase (>1000U/mL or around 3-fold upper limit of normal). The 
degree of elevation is not related to severity of disease. Amylase may be normal 
even in severe pancreatitis (levels starts to fall within 24–48h). It is excreted renally 
so renal failure will  levels. Cholecystitis, mesenteric infarction, and GI perforation 
can cause lesser rises. Serum lipase is more sensitive and speciﬁ c for pancreat itis 
(especially when related to alcohol), and rises earlier and falls later. ABG to monitor 
oxy genation and acid–base status.  AXR: No psoas shadow (retroperitoneal ﬂ uid), 
‘sentinel loop’ of proximal jejunum from ileus (solitary air-ﬁ lled dilatation). Erect CXR 
helps exclude other causes (eg perforation). CT is the standard choice of imaging to 
assess severity and for complications. US (if gallstones + AST). ERCP if LFTS worsen. CRP 
>150mg/L at 36h after admission is a predictor of severe pancreatitis.
Management Severity assessment is essential (see BOX and table 13.17).
  • Nil  by  mouth,  consider  NJ  feeding  (decrease  pancreatic  stimulation).  Set  up  IVI 
and give lots of crystalloid, to counter third-space sequestration, un til vital signs 
are satisfactory and urine ﬂ ow stays at >30mL/h. Insert a urinary catheter and 
consider CVP monitoring.

  • Analgesia:  pethidine  75–100mg/4h  IM,  or  morphine  (may  cause  Oddi’s  sphincter 

to contract more, but it is a better analgesic and not contraindicated).

  • Hourly pulse, BP, and urine output; daily FBC, U&E, Ca2+, glucose, amylase, ABG.
  • If worsening: ITU, O2 if PaO2. In suspected abscess formation or pancreatic ne-
crosis (on CT), consider parenteral nutrition ± laparotomy & debridement (‘necro-
sectomy’). Antibiotics may help in severe disease.

  • ERCP + gallstone removal may be needed if there is progressive jaundice.
  • Repeat imaging (usually CT) is performed in order to monitor progress.
 Any acute abdomen (p606), myocardial infarct.
Early complications Shock, ARDS (p186), renal failure (give lots of ﬂ uid!), DIC, sep-
sis, Ca2+, glucose (transient; 5% need insulin).
Late complications (>1wk.) Pancreatic necrosis and pseudocyst (ﬂ uid in lesser 
sac,  ﬁ g  13.45), with  fever, a  mass  ±  persistent  amylase/LFT;  may  resolve  or  need 
drainage. Abscesses need draining. Bleeding from elastase eroding a major ves-
sel (eg splenic artery); embolization may be life-saving. Thrombosis may occur in 
the  splenic/gastro duodenal  arteries,  or  colic  branches  of  the  SMA,  causing  bowel 
necrosis. Fistulae normally close spontaneously. If purely pancreatic they do not 
irritate the skin. Some patients suff er recurrent oedematous pancreatitis so often 
that near-total pancreat ectomy is contemplated. It can all be a miserable course. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   636

_OHCM_10e.indb   636

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Modiﬁ ed Glasgow criteria for predicting severity of pancreatitis
Three or more positive factors detected within 48h of onset suggest severe pan-
creatitis, and should prompt transfer to ITU/HDU. Mnemonic: PANCREAS.

637

Table 13.17 

PaO2
Age
Neutrophilia
Calcium
Renal function
Enzymes
Albumin
Sugar

<8kPa
>55yrs
WBC >15 x 109/L
<2mmol/L
Urea >16mmol/L
LDH >600iu/L; AST >200iu/L
<32g/L (serum)
Blood glucose >10mmol/L

Republished with permission of Royal College of Surgeons of England, from
Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, Moore E M, 82, 16–17, 2002.
Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
These  criteria  have  been  validated  for  pancreatitis  caused  by  gallstones  and
alcohol; Ranson’s criteria are valid for alcohol-induced pancreatitis, and can only 
be fully applied after 48h, which does have its disadvantages. Other criteria for 
assessing severity include the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Examination 
(APACHE)-II, and the Bedside Index for Severity in Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP).

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.45  Axial CT of the abdomen (with IV and PO contrast media) show-
ing a pancreatic pseudocyst occupying the lesser sac of the abdomen pos-
terior to the stomach. It is called a ‘pseudocyst’ because it is not a true cyst, 
rather a collection of ﬂ uid in the lesser sac (ie not lined by epi/endothelium). 
It develops at ≥6wks. The cyst ﬂ uid is of low attenuation compared with the 
stomach contents because it has not been enhanced by the contrast media.

Image courtesy of Dr Stephen Golding.

_OHCM_10e.indb   637

_OHCM_10e.indb   637

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

638

Urinary tract calculi (nephrolithiasis)

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Renal stones (calculi) consist of crystal aggregates. Stones form in collecting ducts 
and may be deposited anywhere from the renal pelvis to the urethra, though classi-
cally at: 1 Pelviureteric junction 2 Pelvic brim 3 Vesicoureteric junction.
Prevalence Common: lifetime incidence up to 15%. Peak age: 20–40yr. :≈3:1.
Types  •Calcium  oxalate  (75%).  •Magnesium  ammonium  phosphate  (struvite/triple 
phosphate; 15%). •Also: urate (5%), hydroxyapatite (5%), brushite, cystine (1%), mixed.
Presentation Asymptomatic or: 1 Pain: Excruciating spasms of renal colic ‘loin to 
groin’ (or genitals/inner thigh), with nausea/vomiting. Often cannot lie still (diff erenti-
ates from perit onitis). Obstruction of kidney: felt in the loin, between rib 12 and lateral 
edge of lumbar muscles (like intercostal nerve irritation pain; the latter is not colicky, 
and is worsened by speciﬁ c movements/pressure on a trigger spot). Obstruction of 
mid-ureter: may mimic appendicitis/diverticulitis. Obstruction of lower ureter: may 
lead to symptoms of bladder irritability and pain in scrotum, penile tip, or labia ma-
jora. Obstruction in bladder or urethra: causes pelvic pain, dysuria, strangury (desire 
but inability to void) ± interrupted ﬂ ow. 2 Infection: Can coexist (risk if voiding im-
paired), eg UTI; pyelo nephritis (fever, rigors, loin pain, nausea, vomiting); pyonephrosis 
(infected hydronephrosis) 3 Haematuria. 4 Proteinuria. 5 Sterile pyuria. 6 Anuria.
Examination Usually no tenderness on palpation. May be renal angle tenderness 
especially to percussion if there is retroperitoneal inﬂ ammation.
Tests FBC, U&E, Ca2+, PO4
3Ω, glucose, bicarbonate, urate. Urine dipstick: Usually +ve for 
blood (90%). MSU: MC&S. Further tests for cause: Urine pH; 24h urine for: calcium, ox-
alate, urate, citrate, sodium, creatinine; stone biochemistry (sieve urine & send stone).
Imaging: Non-contrast CT is investigation of choice for imaging stones (99% visible) 
& helps exclude diff erential causes of an acute abdomen. A ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm may present similarly. 80% of stones are visible on KUB XR (kidneys + 
ureters + bladder). Look along ureters for calciﬁ  cation over the transverse processes 
of the vertebral bodies. US an alternative for hydronephrosis or hydroureter.
 Initially: Analgesia, eg diclofenac 75mg IV/IM, or 100mg PR. (If CI: opioids) + IV ﬂ uids 
if unable to tolerate PO; antibiotics (eg piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5g/8h IV, or gen-
tamicin) if infection. Stones <5mm in lower ureter: ~90–95% pass spontaneously. 
Fluid intake. Stones >5mm/pain not resolving: Medical expulsive therapy: start 
at presentation; nifedipine 10mg/8h PO or -blockers (tam sulosin 0.4mg/d) promote 
expulsion and reduce analgesia requirements. Most pass within 48h (>80% after 
~30d). If not, try extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) (if <1cm), or ureteros-
copy using a basket. ESWL: US waves shatter stone. SE: renal injury, may also cause BP 
and DM. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL): keyhole surgery to remove stones, 
when large, multiple, or complex. Open surgery is rare.
Indications  for  urgent  intervention  (delay  kills  glomeruli):  Presence  of  infec-
tion and obstruction—a percutaneous nephr ostomy or ureteric stent may be needed 
to relieve obstruction (p640); urosepsis; intractable pain or vomiting; impending AKI; 
obstruction in a solitary kidney; bilateral obstructing stones.
Prevention General:  Drink plenty. Normal dietary Ca2+ intake (low Ca2+ diets in-
crease oxalate excretion). Speciﬁ cally: •Calcium stones: in hypercalciuria, a thiazide 
diuretic is used to Ca2+ excretion. •Oxalate: oxalate intake; pyridoxine may be used 
(p295). •Struvite (phosphate mineral): treat infection promptly. •Urate: allopurinol 
(100–300mg/24h PO). Urine alkalinization may also help, as urate is more soluble at 
pH>6 (eg with potassium citrate or sodium bicarbonate). •Cystine: vigorous hydra-
tion  to  keep  urine  output  >3L/d  and  urinary  alkalinization  (as  above-mentioned). 
Penicillamine is used to chelate cystine, given with pyridoxine to prevent vitamin 
B6 deﬁ ciency.

_OHCM_10e.indb   638

_OHCM_10e.indb   638

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

639

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Questions to address when confronted by a stone
What is its composition? (See table 13.18.)
Table 13.18  Types, causes, and X-ray appearance of renal stones

Type
Calcium oxalate (ﬁ g 13.46) Metabolic or idiopathic
Metabolic or idiopathic
Calcium phosphate

Causative factors

Magnesium ammonium 
phosphate (ﬁ g 13.47)

Urate (p680)
Cystine (ﬁ g 13.48)

UTI (proteus causes al-
kaline urine and calcium 
precipitation and ammo-
nium salt formation)
Hyperuricaemia
Renal tubular defect

Appearance on X-ray
Spiky, radio-opaque
Smooth, may be large, radio-
opaque
Large, horny, ‘staghorn’, radio-
opaque

Smooth, brown, radiolucent
Yellow, crystalline, semi-opaque

Why has he or she got this stone now?
  • Diet: chocolate, tea, rhubarb, strawberries, nuts, and spinach all oxalate levels.
  • Season: variations in calcium and oxalate levels are thought to be mediated by 

vitamin D synthesis via sunlight on skin.

  • Work: can he/she drink freely at work? Is there dehydration?
  • Medications:  precipitating  drugs  include:  diuretics,  antacids,  acetazolamide, 

corticosteroids, theophylline, aspirin, allopurinol, vitamin C and D, indinavir.

Are there any predisposing factors? For example:
  • Recurrent UTIS (in magnesium ammonium phosphate calculi).
  • Metabolic abnormalities:

  • Hypercalciuria/hypercalcaemia  (p676):  hyperparathyroidism,  neoplasia, 
sarc oid osis, hyperthyroidism, Addison’s, Cushing’s, lithium, vitamin D excess.

  • Hyperuricosuria/plasma urate: on its own, or with gout.
  • Hyperoxaluria.
  • Cystinuria (p321).
  • Renal tubular acidosis (pp316–7).

  • Urinary  tract  abnormalities:  eg  pelviureteric  junction  obstruction,  hydro-
nephrosis  (renal  pelvis  or  calyces),  calyceal  diverticulum,  horseshoe  kidney, 
ureterocele, vesicoureteric reﬂ ux, ureteral stricture, medullary sponge kidney.11

  • Foreign bodies: eg stents, catheters.
Is there a family history? Risk of stones 3-fold. Speciﬁ c diseases include X-linked 
nephrolithiasis and Dent’s disease (proteinuria, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis).
Is there infection above the stone? Eg fever, loin tender, pyuria? This needs 
urgent intervention.

Fig 13.46  Calcium oxalate 
monohydrate.
Image courtesy of Dr Glen Austin.

Fig 13.47  Struvite stone.
Image courtesy of Dr Glen Austin.

Fig 13.48  Cystine stone.
Image courtesy of Dr Glen Austin.

11  Medullary sponge kidney is a typically asymptomatic developmental anomaly of the kidney mostly seen 
in adult females, where there is dilatation of the collecting ducts, which if severe leads to a sponge-like 
appearance of the renal medulla. Complications/associations: UTIs, nephrolithiasis, haematuria and hyper-
calciuria, hyperparathyroidism (if present, look for genetic markers of MEN type 2A, see p223).

_OHCM_10e.indb   639

_OHCM_10e.indb   639

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

640

Urinary tract obstruction

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Urinary tract obstruction is common and should be considered in any patient with 
impaired  renal  function.  Damage  can  be  permanent  if  the  obstruction  is  not 
treated promptly. Obstruction may occur anywhere from the renal calyces to the 
urethral meatus, and may be partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral. Obstruct-
ing lesions are luminal (stones, blood clot, sloughed papilla, tumour: renal, ureteric, 
or bladder), mural (eg congenital or acquired stricture, neuromuscular dysfunction, 
schistosomiasis), or extra-mural (abdom  inal or pelvic mass/tumour, retroperitoneal 
ﬁ brosis,  or  iatrogenic—eg  post  surgery).  Unilateral  obstruction  may  be  clinically 
silent (normal urine output and U&E) if the other kidney is functioning. Bilateral 
obstruction or obstruction with infection requires urgent treatment. See p641.
Clinical features
  • Acute upper tract obstruction: Loin pain radiating to the groin. There may be 

superimposed infection ± loin tenderness, or an enlarged kidney.

  • Chronic upper tract obstruction: Flank pain, renal failure, superimposed infection. 

Polyuria may occur due to impaired urinary concentration.

  • Acute  lower  tract  obstruction:  Acute  urinary  retention  typically  presents  with 
severe suprapubic pain ± acute confusion (elderly); often acute on chronic (hence 
preceded by chronic symptoms , see next bullet point). Clinically: distended, palpable 
bladder containing ~600mL, dull to percussion. Causes include prostatic obstruction 
(usual cause in older ), urethral strictures, anticholinergics, blood clots eg from 
bladder lesion (‘clot retention’), alcohol, constipation, post-op (pain/inﬂ ammation/
anaesthetics), infection (p296), neurological (cauda equina syndrome, see p466).
  • Chronic lower tract obstruction: Symptoms: urinary frequency, hesitancy, poor 
stream, terminal dribbling, overﬂ ow incontinence. Signs: distended, palpable blad-
der  (capacity  may  be  >1.5L)  ±  large  prostate  on  PR.  Complications:  UTI,  urinary 
retention,  renal  failure  (eg  bilateral  obstructive  uropathy—see  BOX  ‘Obstructive 
uropathy’).  Causes  include  prostatic  enlargement  (common);  pelvic  malignancy; 
rectal surgery; DM; CNS disease, eg transverse myelitis/MS; zoster (S2–S4).

Tests Blood: U&E, creatinine, FBC, and prostate-speciﬁ c antigen (PSA, p530).12 Urine: 
Dipstick and MC&S. Ultrasound (p744) is the imaging modality of choice for investi-
gating upper tract obstruction: If there is hydronephrosis or hydroureter (distension 
of the renal pelvis and calyces or ureter), arrange a CT scan. This will determine the 
level of obstuction. NB: in ~5% of cases of obstruction, no distension is seen on US. 
Radionuclide imaging enables functional assessment of the kidneys.
Treatment Upper tract obstruction: Nephrostomy or ureteric stent. NB: stents may 
cause signiﬁ cant discomfort and patients should be warned of this and other risks 
(see BOX ‘Problems of ureteric stenting’). -blockers help reduce stent-related pain 
(ureteric spasm). Pyeloplasty, to widen the PUJ, may be performed for idiopathic 
PUJ obstruction.
Lower tract obstruction: Insert a urethral or suprapubic catheter (p762) to relieve 
acute retention. In chronic obstruction only catheterize patient if there is pain, uri-
nary infection, or renal impairment; intermittent self-catheterization is sometimes 
required (p763). If in clot retention the patient will require a 3-way catheter and 
bladder washout. If >1L residual check U&E and monitor for post-obstructive diure-
sis (see BOX ‘Obstructive uropathy’). Monitor weight, ﬂ uid balance, and U&E closely. 
Treat the underlying cause if possible, eg if prostatic obstruction, start an -blocker 
(see p642). After 2–3 days, trial without catheter (TWOC, p763) may work (especially 
if <75yrs old and <1L drained or retention was triggered by a passing event, eg GA). 

12  Do venepuncture for PSA before PR, as PR can  total PSA by ~1ng/mL (free PSA  by 10%). It’s diffi  cult 
to know if acute retention raises PSA, but relieving obstruction does cause it to drop.

_OHCM_10e.indb   640

_OHCM_10e.indb   640

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

641

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Problems of ureteric stenting (depend on site)
Common:
  • Stent-related pain
  • Trigonal irritation
  • Haematuria
  • Fever
  • Infection
  • Tissue inﬂ ammation
  • Encrustation
  • Bioﬁ lm formation.

Rare:
  • Obstruction
  • Kinking
  • Ureteric rupture
  • Stent misplacement
  • Stent migration (especially if made of silicone)
  • Tissue hyperplasia
  • Forgotton stents.

Obstructive uropathy
In  chronic  urinary  retention,  an  episode  of  acute  retention  may  go  unnoticed 
for  days  and,  because  of  their  background  symptoms,  may  only  present  when 
overﬂ ow  incontinence  becomes  a  nuisance—pain  is  not  necessarily  a  feature. 
After  diagnosing  acute  on  chr onic 
retent ion and placing a catheter, the 
bladder residual can be as much as 
1.5L  of  urine.  Don’t  be  surprised  to 
be called by the biochemistry lab to 
be told that the serum creatinine is 
1000μmol/L!  The  good  news  is  that 
renal  fun ction  usually  returns  to 
baseline after a few days (there may 
be  mild  background  impairment). 
Ask for an urgent renal US (ﬁ g 13.49) 
and  con sider  the  following  in  the 
acute plan to ensure a safe course:
  • Hyperkalaemia See p301.
  • Metabolic acidosis On ABG there 

Fig  13.49  Ultrasound  of  an  obstr ucted  kidney 
show ing hydro nephrosis. Note dilatation of renal 
pelvis and ureter, and clubbed calyces.

Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

is likely to be a respiratory compensated metabolic acidosis. Concerns should 
prompt discussion with a renal specialist (a good idea anyway), in case haemo-
dialysis is required (p306).

  • Post-obstructive diuresis In the acute phase after relief of the obstruction, the 
kidneys produce a lot of urine—as much as a litre in the ﬁ rst hour. It is vital to 
provide resuscitation ﬂ uids and then match input with output. Fluid depletion 
rather than overload is the danger here.

  • Sodium- and bicarbonate–losing nephropathy As the kidney undergoes diu-
resis, Na+ and bicarbonate are lost in the urine in large quantities. Replace ‘in for 
out’ (as mentioned above) with isotonic 1 . 26% sodium bicarbonate solution—this 
should be available from ITU. Some advocate using 0.9% saline, though the chlo-
ride load may exacerbate acidosis. Withhold any nephrotoxic drugs.

  • Infection Treat infection, bearing in mind that the WCC and CRP may be part of 

the stress response. Send a sample of urine for MC&S.

_OHCM_10e.indb   641

_OHCM_10e.indb   641

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

642

Benign prostatic hyperplasia

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is common (24% if aged 40–64; 40% if older). 
Pathology: Benign nodular or diff use proliferation of musculoﬁ brous and glandular 
layers of the prostate. Inner (transitional) zone enlarges in contrast to peripheral lay-
er expansion seen in prostate carcinoma. Features: Lower urinary tract symptoms 
(LUTS) = nocturia, frequency, urgency, post-micturition dribbling, poor stream/ﬂ ow, 
hesitancy,  overﬂ ow  incontinence,  haematuria,  bladder  stones,  UTI.  Management: 
Assess severity of symptoms and impact on life. PR exam. Tests: MSU; U&E; ultrasound 
(large residual volume, hydronephrosis—ﬁ g 13.49), PSA (prior to PR exam; see also BOX 
‘Advice to asymptomatic men’, p645), transrectal US ± biopsy. Then consider:
  • Lifestyle: Avoid caff eine, alcohol (to urgency/nocturia). Relax when voiding. Void 
twice in a row to aid emptying. Control urgency by prac tising distraction methods 
(eg breathing exercises). Train the bladder by ‘holding on’ to  time between voiding.
  • Drugs are useful in mild disease, and while awaiting surgery. • -blockers are 1st 
line  (eg  tamsulosin  400mcg/d  PO;  also  alfuzosin,  doxazosin,  terazosin).  Smooth 
muscle  tone  (prostate  and  bladder).  SE:  drowsiness;  depression;  dizziness;  BP; 
dry mouth; ejaculatory failure; extra-pyramidal signs; nasal congestion; weight. 
• 5-reductase inhibitors: can be added, or used alone, eg ﬁ nasteride 5mg/d PO 
(conversion of testosterone to the more potent androgen dihydrotestosterone). 
Excreted in semen, so use condoms; females should avoid handling. SE: impotence; 
libido. prostate size over 3–6mths and  long-term retention risk.

  • Surgery:

  • Transurethral  resection  of  prostate  (TURP)  ≤14%  become  impotent  (see  BOX). 
Crossmatch 2U. Beware bleeding, clot retention, and post TURP syndrome: absorp-
tion of washout causing CNS & CVS disturbance. ~12% need redoing within 8yrs.
  • Transurethral incision of the prostate (TUIP) involves less destruction than 
TURP, and less risk to sexual function, gives similar beneﬁ t. Relieves pressure 
on the urethra. Maybe best surgical option for those with small glands <30g.

  • Retropubic prostatectomy is an open operation (if prostate very large).
  • Transurethral laser-induced prostatectomy (TULIP) may be as good as TURP.
  • Robotic prostatectomy is gaining popularity as a less traumatic and minimally 

invasive treatment option.

  • Infection; prostatitis
  • Erectile dysfunction ~10%
  • Incontinence ≤10%
  • Clot retention near strictures
  • Retrograde ejaculation (common).

Advice for patients concerning transurethral prostatectomy (TURP)
Pre-op consent issues may centre on risks of the procedure, eg:
  • Haematuria/haemorrhage
  • Haematospermia
  • Hypothermia
  • Urethral trauma/stricture
  • Post TURP syndrome (T°; Na+)
Post–operative advice
  • Avoid driving for 2wks after the operation.
  • Avoid sex for 2wks after surgery. Then get back to normal. The amount ejacu-
lated may be reduced (as it ﬂ ows backwards into the bladder—harmless, but 
may cloud the urine). It means you may be infertile. Erections may be a problem 
after TURP, but do not expect this: in some men, erections improve. Rarely, orgas-
mic sensations are reduced.

  • Expect to pass blood in the urine for the ﬁ rst 2wks. A small amount of blood 

colours the urine bright red. Do not be alarmed.

  • At ﬁ rst you may need to urinate more frequently than before. Do not be de-
spondent. In 6wks things should be much better—but the operation cannot be 
guaranteed to work (8% fail, and lasting incontinence is a problem in 6%; 12% 
may need repeat TURPS within 8yrs, compared with 1.8% of men undergoing open 
prostatectomy).

  • If feverish, or if urination hurts, take a sample of urine to your doctor.

_OHCM_10e.indb   642

_OHCM_10e.indb   642

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis 

643

Causes  Idiopathic  retroperitoneal  ﬁ brosis  (RPF),  inﬂ ammatory  aneurysms  of  the 
abdominal aorta, and perianeurysmal  RPF. With idiopathic  RPF there is an associ-
ated  inﬂ ammatory  response  resulting  in  ﬁ brinoid  necrosis  of  the  vasa  vasorum, 
aff ecting the aorta and small and medium retroperitoneal vessels. The ureters get 
embedded  in  dense,  ﬁ brous  tissue  resulting  in  progressive  bilateral  ureteric  ob-
struction. Secondary causes of RPF include malignancy, typically lymphoma.
Associations  Drugs  (eg  -blockers,  bromocriptine,  methysergide,  methyldopa), 
autoimmune disease (eg thyroiditis, SLE, ANCA+ve vasculitis), smoking, asbestos.
Typical patient Middle-aged  with vague loin, back, or abdominal pain, BP.
Tests  Blood:  Urea  and  creatinine;  ESR;  CRP;  anaemia.  Ultrasound:  Dilated  ure-
ters  (hydronephrosis).  CT/MRI:  Periaortic  mass  (ﬁ g  13.50).  Biopsy  under  imaging 
guidance is used to rule out malignancy.
Treatment Retrograde stent placement to relieve obstruction (removed after 12 
months) ± ureterolysis (dissection of the ureters from the retroperitoneal tissue). 
Immunosuppression (in idiopathic RPF) with low-dose steroids has good long-term 
results.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.50  CT scan of retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis (RPF), with subsequent obstruction and dilatation of 
the ureters (thick arrows).

Reproduced from Davison et al., Oxford Textbook of Nephrology, 2005, 
with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   643

_OHCM_10e.indb   643

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

644

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Urinary tract malignancies 
Renal  cell  carcinoma (RCC)  arises  from  proximal  renal  tubular  epithelium.  Epi-
demiology: Accounts for 90% of renal cancers; mean age 55yrs. :≈2:1. 15% of 
haemodialysis patients develop RCC. Features: 50% found incidentally. Haematuria, 
loin pain, abdominal mass, anorexia, malaise, weight loss,  PUO—often in isolation. 
Rarely, invasion of left renal vein compresses left testicular vein causing a varicocele. 
Spread may be direct (renal vein), via lymph, or haemat ogenous (bone, liver, lung). 
25% have metastases at presentation. Tests: BP: from renin secretion. Blood: FBC 
(polycythaemia  from  erythropoietin  secretion);  ESR;  U&E,  ALP  (bony  mets?).  Urine: 
RBCS; cytology. Imaging: US (p744); CT/MRI; CXR (‘cannon ball’ metastases). : Radical 
nephrectomy (nephron-sparing surgery is as good for T1 tumours + preserves renal 
function). Cryotherapy and radiofrequency ablation is an option for patients unﬁ t or 
unwilling to undergo surgery. RCC is generally radio- & chemoresistant. In those with 
unresectable or metastatic disease, options include: high-dose IL-2 and other T-cell 
activation therapies; anti-angiogenesis agents (eg pazopanib, sunitinib, axitinib, or 
bevacizumab); mTOR inhibitors, eg temsir olimus. The Mayo prognostic risk score 
(SSIGN) was developed to predict survival and uses information on tumour stage, 
size, grade, and necrosis. Prognosis: 10yr survival ranges from 96.5% (scores 0–1) to 
19.2% (scores ≥ 10).
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) may arise in the bladder (50%), ureter, or renal 
pelvis. Epidemiology: Age >40yrs; :≈4:1. Risk factors: p646. Presentation: Pain-
less haematuria; frequency; urgency; dysuria; urinary tract obstruction. Diagnosis: 
Urine  cytology;  IVU;  cystoscopy  +  biopsy;  CT/MRI.  :  See  ‘Bladder  tumours’,  p646. 
Prognosis: Varies with clinical stage/histological grade: 10–80% 5yr survival.
Wilms’ tumour (nephroblastoma) is a childhood tumour of primitive renal tubules 
and mesenchymal cells. Prevalence: 1:100 000—the chief abdominal malignancy in 
children. It presents with an abdominal mass and haematuria. : OHCS p133.
Prostate  cancer  The  commonest  male  malignancy.  Incidence:  with  age:  80% 
in men >80yrs (autopsy studies). Associations: +ve family history (x2–3 risk, p521), 
testost erone. Most are adenocarcinomas arising in peripheral prostate. Spread may 
be local (seminal vesicles, bladder, rectum) via lymph, or haemat ogenously (sclerotic 
bony lesions). Symptoms: Asymptomatic or nocturia, hesitancy, poor stream, terminal 
dribbling, or obstruction. Weight ± bone pain suggests mets. DRE exam of prostate: 
may show hard, irregular prostate. Diagnosis: PSA (normal in 30% of small cancers); 
transrectal US & biopsy; bone scan; CT/MRI. Staging: MRI. Treatment: Disease conﬁ ned 
to prostate: options depend on prognosis (see BOX ‘Prognostic factors’), patient prefer-
ence, and comorbidities. •Radical prostatectomy if <70yrs gives excellent disease-free 
survival (laparoscopic surgery is as good). The role of adjuvant hormonal therapy is 
being explored. •Radical radiotherapy (± neoadjuvant & adjuvant hormonal therapy) is 
an alternative curative option that compares favourably with surgery (no RCTS). It may 
be delivered as external beam or brachytherapy. •Hormone therapy alone temporar-
ily delays tumour progression but refractory disease eventually develops. Consider 
in elderly, unﬁ t patients with high-risk disease. •Active surveillance—particularly if 
>70yrs and low-risk. Metastatic disease: •Hormonal drugs may give beneﬁ t for 1–2yrs. 
LHRH agonists, eg 12-weekly goserelin (10.8mg SC) ﬁ rst stimulate, then inhibit pituitary 
gonadotrophin. NB: risks tumour ‘ﬂ are’ when ﬁ rst used—start anti-androgen, eg cypro-
terone acetate, in susceptible patients. The LHRH antagonist degarelix is also used in 
advanced disease. Symptomatic : Analgesia; treat hypercalc aemia; radiotherapy for 
bone mets/spinal cord compression. Prognosis: 10% die in 6 months, 10% live >10yrs. 
Screening: DRE of prostate; transrectal US; PSA (see BOX ‘Advice to asymptomatic men’).
Penile cancer Epidemiology: Rare in UK, more common in Far East and Africa, very rare 
in circumcised. Related to chronic irritation, viruses, smegma. Presentation: Chronic 
fungating  ulcer,  bloody/purulent  discharge,  50%  spread  to  lymph  at  presentation 
: Radiotherapy & irridium wires if early; amputation & lymph node dissection if late.

_OHCM_10e.indb   644

_OHCM_10e.indb   644

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Advice to asymptomatic men asking for a PSA blood test 
  • Many men over 50 consider a PSA test to detect prostatic cancer.  Is this wise?
  • The test is not very accurate, and we cannot say that those having the test will 
live longer—even if they turn out to have prostate cancer. Most men with pros-
tate cancer die from an unrelated cause.

  • If the test is falsely positive, you may needlessly have more tests, eg prostate 
sampling via the back passage (causes bleeding and infection in 1–5% of men).

  • Only one in three of those with a high PSA level will have cancer.
  • You may be worried needlessly if later tests put you in the clear.
  • If a cancer is found, there’s no way to tell for sure if it will impinge on health. You 

might end up having a bad eff ect from treatment that wasn’t needed.

  • There is much uncertainty on treating those who do turn out to have prostate 
cancer: options are radical surgery to remove the prostate (risks erectile dys-
function and incontinence),   radiotherapy, or hormones.

  • Screening via PSA has shown conﬂ icting results. Some RCTS have shown no dif-
ference in the rate of death from prostate cancer, others have found reduced 
mortality, eg 1 death prevented per 1055 men invited for screening (if 37 cancers 
detected).

Ultimately, you must decide for yourself what you want.

645

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Prognostic factors in prostate cancer
A number of prognostic factors help determine if ‘watchful waiting’ or agg ressive 
therapy should be advised: •Pre-treatment PSA level. •Tumour stage (as measured 
by the TNM system; p523). •Tumour grade—Gleason score. Gleason grading is from 
1 to 5, with 5 being the highest grade, and carrying the poorest prognosis. Gleason 
grades are decided by analysing histology from two separate areas of tumour 
specimen, and adding them to get the total Gleason score for the tumour, from 2 
to 10. Scores 8–10 suggest an aggressive tumour; 5–7: intermediate; 2–4: indolent. 

Benign diseases of the penis
Balanitis Acute inﬂ ammation of the foreskin and glans. Associated with strep 
and staph infections. More common in diabetics. Often seen in young children with 
tight foreskins : Antibiotics, circumcision, hygiene advice.
Phimosis The foreskin occludes the meatus. In young boys this causes recurrent 
balanitis and ballooning, but time (+ trials of gentle retraction) may obviate the 
need for circumcision. In adulthood presents with painful intercourse, infection, 
ulceration, and is associated with balanitis xerotica obliterans.
Paraphimosis Occurs when a tight foreskin is retracted and becomes irreplace-
able, preventing venous return leading to oedema and even ischaemia of the glans. 
Can occur if the foreskin is not replaced after catheterization. : Ask patient 
to squeeze glans. Try applying a 50% glucose-soaked swab (oedema may follow 
osmotic gradient). Ice packs and lidocaine gel may also help. May require aspira-
tion/dorsal slit/circumcision.

Prostatitis
May be acute or chronic. Usually those >35yrs. Acute prostatitis is caused mostly 
by S. faecalis and E. coli, also Chlamydia (and previously TB). Features: UTIs, reten-
tion, pain, haematospermia, swollen/boggy prostate on DRE. : Analgesia; levoﬂ oxa-
cin 500mg/24h PO for 28d. Chronic prostatitis may be bacterial or non-bacterial. 
Symptoms as for acute prostatitis, but present for >3 months. Non-bacterial chronic 
prostatitis does not respond to antibiotics. Anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs, –blockers, 
and prostatic massage all have a place.

_OHCM_10e.indb   645

_OHCM_10e.indb   645

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

646

Bladder tumours

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

>90% are transitional cell carcinomas (TCCS) in the UK. Adenocarcin omas and squa-
mous cell carcinomas are rare in the West (the latter may follow schistosomiasis). 
UK incidence ≈ 1:6000/yr. :≈5:2. Histology is important for prognosis: Grade 1—
diff erentiated; Grade 2—intermediate; Grade 3—poorly diff er entiated. 80% are con-
ﬁ ned to bladder mucosa, and only ~20% penetrate muscle (increasing mortality to 
50% at 5yrs).
Presentation Painless haematuria; recurrent UTIs; voiding irritability.
Associations Smoking; aromatic amines (rubber industry); chronic cystitis; schisto-
somiasis (risk of squamous cell carcinoma); pelvic irradiation.
Tests
  • Cystoscopy with biopsy is diagnostic.
  • Urine: microscopy/cytology (cancers may cause sterile pyuria).
  • CT urogram is both diagnostic and provides staging.
  • Bimanual EUA helps assess spread.
  • MRI or lymphangiography may show involved pelvic nodes.
Staging See table 13.19.
Treating TCC of the bladder
  • Tis/Ta/T1:  (80%  of  all  patients)  Diathermy  via  transurethral  cystoscopy/trans-
urethral resection of bladder tumour (TURBT). Consider a regimen of intravesical 
BCG (which stimulates a non-speciﬁ c immune response) for multiple small tumours 
or high-grade tumours. Alternative chemotherapeutic agents include mitomycin, 
epirubicin and gemcitabine. 5yr survival ≈ 95%.

  • T2–3:  Radical  cystectomy  is  the  ‘gold  standard’.  Radiotherapy  gives  worse  5yr 
survival rates than surgery, but preserves the bladder. ‘Salvage’ cystectomy can 
be  performed  if  radiotherapy  fails,  but  yields  worse  results  than  primary  sur-
gery.  Post-op  chemotherapy  (eg  M-VAC:  methotrexate,  vinblastine,  doxorubicin, 
and cisplatin) is toxic but eff ective. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with M-VAC or GC 
(gemcitabine and cisplatin) has improved survival compared to cystectomy or ra-
diotherapy alone. Methods to preserve the bladder with transurethral resection or 
partial cyst ectomy + systemic chemo therapy have been tried, but long-term results 
are disappointing. If the bladder neck is not involved, orthotopic reconstr uction 
rather than forming a urostoma is an option (both using ~40cm of the patient’s 
ileum), but adequate tumour clearance must not be compromised. The patient 
should have all these options explained by a urologist and an oncologist.

  • T4: Usually palliative chemo/radiotherapy. Chronic catheterization and urinary di-

versions may help to relieve pain.

Follow-up History, examination, and regular cystoscopy: •High-risk tumours: Every 
3 months for 2yrs, then every 6 months. •Low-risk tumours: First follow-up cystos-
copy after 9 months, then yearly.
Tumour spread Local  to pelvic structures; lymphatic  to iliac and para-aortic 
nodes; haematogenous  to liver and lungs.
Survival This depends on age at surgery. For example, the 3yr survival after cystec-
tomy for T2 and T3 tumours is 60% if 65–75yrs old, falling to 40% if 75–82yrs old (op-
erative mortality is 4%). With unilateral pelvic node involvement, only 6% of patients 
survive 5yrs. The 3yr survival with bilateral or para-aortic node involvement is nil.
Complications Cystectomy can result in sexual and urinary malfunction. Massive 
bladder haemorrhage may complicate treatment or be a feature of disease treated 
palliatively. Determining the cause of bleeding is key. Consider alum solution blad-
der irrigation (if no renal failure) as 1st-line treatment for intractable haematuria in 
advanced malignancy: it is an inpatient procedure.

_OHCM_10e.indb   646

_OHCM_10e.indb   646

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

647

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Carcinoma in situ
Tumour conﬁ ned to epithelium
Tumour in submucosa or lamina propria
Invades muscle
Extends into perivesical fat
Invades adjacent organs
No LN involved

Table 13.19  TNM staging of bladder cancer (See also p523)
Tis
Ta
T1
T2
T3
T4
N0
N1–N3 Progressive LN involvement
M0
M1

No metastases
Distant metastasis

Reproduced with permission from Edge, SB et al. (Eds.), AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 
7th Edition. New York: Springer; 2010.

Is asymptomatic non-visible haematuria signiﬁ cant?
Dipstick tests are often done routinely for patients on admission. If non-visible 
(previously  microscopic)  haematuria  is  found,  but  the  patient  has  no  related 
symptoms, what does this mean? Before rushing into a barrage of investigations, 
consider:
  • One study found that incidence of urogenital disease (eg bladder cancer) was 
no higher in those with asymptomatic microhaematuria than in those without.
  • Asymptomatic non-visible haematuria is the sole presenting feature in only 4% 
of bladder cancers, and there is no evidence that these are less advanced than 
malignancies presenting with macroscopic haematuria.

  • When monitoring those with treated bladder cancer for recurrence, non-visible-
haematuria tests have a sensitivity of only 31% in those with superﬁ cial bladder 
malignancy, in whom detection would be most useful.

  • Although 80% of those with ﬂ ank pain due to a renal stone have microscopic 

haematuria, so do 50% of those with ﬂ ank pain but no stone.

The conclusion is not that urine dipstick testing is useless, but that results should 
not  be  interpreted  in  isolation.  Unexplained  non-visible  haematuria  in  those 
>50yrs should be referred under the 2-week rule. Smokers and those with +ve 
family  history  for  urothelial  cancer  may  also  be  investigated  diff erently  from 
those with no risk factors. It is worth considering, that in a young, ﬁ t athlete, the 
diagnosis is more likely to be exercise-induced haematuria. Wise doctors work 
collaboratively with their patients. ‘Shall we let sleeping dogs lie?’ is a reasonable 
question for some patients. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   647

_OHCM_10e.indb   647

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

648

Urinary incontinence

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Think twice before inserting a urinary catheter.
Carry out rectal examination to exclude faecal impaction.
Is the bladder palpable after voiding (retention with overﬂ ow)?
Is there neurological comorbidity: eg MS; Parkinson’s disease; stroke; spinal trauma?
Incontinence in men Enlargement of the prostate is the major cause of inconti-
nence:  urge  incontinence  (see  later  in  topic)  or  dribbling  may  result  from  partial 
retention of urine. TURP (p642) & other pelvic surgery may weaken the bladder sphinc-
ter and cause incontinence. Troublesome incontinence needs specialist assessment.
Incontinence in women Often under-reported with delays before seeking help.
  • Functional incontinence: Ie when physiological factors are relatively unimportant. 
The patient is ‘caught short’ and too slow in ﬁ nding the toilet because of (for exam-
ple) immobility, or unfamiliar surroundings.

  • Stress  incontinence:  Leakage  from  an  incompetent  sphincter,  eg  when  intra-
abdominal pressure rises (eg coughing, laughing). Increasing age and obesity are 
risk factors. The key to diagnosis is the loss of small (but often frequent) amounts 
of  urine  when  coughing  etc.  Examine  for  pelvic  ﬂ oor  weakness/prolapse/pelvic 
masses. Look for cough leak on standing and with full bladder. Stress incontinence 
is common in pregnancy and following birth. It occurs to some degree in ~50% of 
post-menopausal women. In elderly women, pelvic ﬂ oor weakness, eg with uterine 
prolapse or urethrocele (OHCS p290), is a very common association.

  • Urge incontinence/overactive bladder syndrome: The urge to urinate is quickly 
followed by uncon t rollable and sometimes complete emptying of the bladder as 
the detrusor muscle contracts. Urgency/leaking is precipitated by: arriving home 
(latchkey incontinence, a conditioned reﬂ ex); cold; the sound of running water; caf-
feine; and obesity.  : urodynamic studies. Cause: detrusor overactivity (see table 
13.20), eg from central inhibitory pathway malfunction or sensitization of peripher-
al aff erent terminals in the bladder; or a bladder muscle problem. Check for organic 
brain damage (eg stroke; Parkinson’s; dementia). Other causes: urinary infection; 
diabetes; diuretics; atrophic vaginitis; urethritis.

In both sexes incontinence may result from confusion or sedation. Occasionally it 
may be purposeful (eg preventing admission to an old people’s home) or due to anger.
Management Eff ective treatment can have a huge impact on quality of life.
Check for: UTI; DM; diuretic use; faecal impaction; palpable bladder; GFR.
  • Stress  incontinence:  Pelvic  ﬂ oor  exercises  are  1st  line  (8  contractions  ≈3/d  for 
3  months).  Intravaginal  electrical  stimulation  may  also  be  eff ective,  but  is  not 
acceptable to many women. A ring pessary may help uterine prolapse, eg while 
awaiting surgical repair. Surgical options (eg tension-free vaginal tape) aim to sta-
bilize the mid-urethra. Urethral bulking also available. Medical options: duloxetine 
40mg/12h PO (50% have ≥50%  in incontinence episodes). SE = nausea. 

  • Urge incontinence: The patient (or carer) should complete an ‘incontinence’ chart 
for 3d to deﬁ ne the pattern of incontinence. Examine for spinal cord and CNS signs 
(including cognitive test, p64); and for vaginitis (if postmenopausal). Vaginitis can 
be treated with topical oestrogen therapy for a limited period. Bladder training 
(may include pelvic ﬂ oor exercises) and weight loss are important. Drugs may help 
reduce night-time incontinence (see BOX) but can be disappointing. Consider aids, 
eg absorbent pad. If  consider a condom catheter.

Do urodynamic assessment (cystometry & urine ﬂ ow rate measurement) before 
any surgical intervention to exclude detrusor overactivity or sphincter dyssynergia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   648

_OHCM_10e.indb   648

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

649

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Table 13.20  Managing detrusor overactivity in urge incontinence
Agents for detrusor overactivity
Antimuscarinics: eg tolterodine SR 
4mg/24h; SE: dry mouth, eyes/skin, 
drowsiness, constipation, tachycardia, 
abdominal pain, urinary retention, 
sinusitis, oedema, weight, glaucoma 
precipitation. Up to 4mg/12h may be 
needed (unlicensed).
Topical oestrogens

Notes
Improves frequency & urgency. Alternatives: 
solifena cin 5mg/24h (max 10mg); oxy butynin, 
but more SE unless transdermal route or modi-
ﬁ ed release used; trospium or feso   terodine 
(prefers M3 receptors). Avoid in myasthenia, 
and if glaucoma or UC are uncontrolled.

3 adrenergic agonist: mirabegron 
50mg/24h; SE tachycardia; CI: severe HTN; 
Caution if renal/hepatic impairment.
Intravesical botulinum toxin (Botox®)
Percutaneous posterior tibial nerve 
stimulation (PTNS). (A typical treatment 
consists of ≈12 weekly 30 min sessions.)

Neuromodulation via transcutaneous 
electrical stimulation
Modulation of aff erent input from 
bladder
Hypnosis, psychotherapy, bladder 
training*
Surgery (eg clam ileocystoplasty)

Post-menopausal urgency, frequency + noc-
turia may occasionally be improved by raising 
the bladder’s sensory threshold. Systemic 
therapy worsens incontinence.
Consider if antimuscarinics are contrain-
dicated or clinically ineff ective, or if SE 
unacceptable.
Consider if above medications ineff ective.
Consider if drug treatment ineff ective and 
Botox® not wanted. PTNS delivers neuromodu-
lation to the S2–S4 junction of the sacral nerve 
plexus. 
Sacral nerve stimulation inhibits the reﬂ ex 
behaviour of involuntary detrusor contractions.
Gabapentin (unlicensed).

(These all require good motivation.)

Reserved for troublesome or intractable 
symptoms. The bladder is bisected, opened 
like a clam, and 25cm of ileum is sewn in.

NB: desmopressin nasal spray 20mcg nocte reduces urine production and  nocturia in overactive bladder. 
Unsuitable if elderly (SE: ﬂ uid retention, heart failure, Na+).
*Mind over bladder: •Void when you DON’T have urge; DON’T go to the bathroom when you do have urge. 
•Gradually extend the time between voiding. •Schedule your trips to toilet. •Stretch your bladder to normal 
capacity. • When urge comes, calm down and make it go using mind over bladder tricks.

Not all male urinary symptoms are prostate-related!
Detrusor overactivity Men get this as well as women. Pressure-ﬂ ow studies 
help diagnose this (as does detrusor thickness ≥2.9mm on US).
Primary  bladder  neck  obstruction  A  condition  in  which  the  bladder  neck 
does  not  open  properly  during  voiding.  Studies  in  men  and  women  with  void-
ing dysfunction show that it is common. The cause may be muscular or neuro-
logical dysfunction or ﬁ brosis. Diagnosis: Video-urodynamics, with simultaneous 
pressure-ﬂ ow measurement, and visualization of the bladder neck during voiding. 
Treatment: Watchful waiting; -blockers (p642); surgery.
Urethral stricture This may follow trauma or infection (eg gonorrhoea)—and 
frequently leads to voiding symptoms, UTI, or retention. Malignancy is a rare cause. 
Imaging: Retrograde urethrogram or antegrade cystourethrogram if the patient 
has an existing suprapubic catheter. Internal urethrotomy involves incising the 
stricture  transurethrally  using  endoscopic  equipment—to  release  scar  tissue. 
Stents incorporate themselves into the wall of the urethra and keep the lumen 
open. They work best for short strictures in the bulbar urethra (anterior urethral 
anatomy, from proximal  to distal:  prostatic urethraposterior or membranous 
urethrabulbar urethrapenile or pendulous urethrafossa navicularismeatus).

_OHCM_10e.indb   649

_OHCM_10e.indb   649

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

650

Lumps in the groin and scrotum

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Testicular lump = cancer until proved otherwise.
Acute, tender enlargement of testis = torsion (p652) until proved otherwise.
Diagnosing scrotal masses (ﬁ g 13.51)
1 Can you get above it? 2 Is it separate from the testis? 3 Cystic or solid?
  • Cannot get above: inguinoscrotal hernia (p614) or hydrocele extending proximally.
  • Separate and cystic: epididymal cyst.
  • Separate and solid: epididymitis/varicocele.
  • Testicular and cystic: hydrocele.
Testicular  and  solid—tumour,  haem atocele,  granuloma  (p196),  orchitis,  gumma 
(p412). US may help.
Epididymal cysts Usually develop in adulthood and contain clear or milky (sperm-
atocele) ﬂ uid. They lie above and behind the testis. Remove if symptomatic.
Hydroceles (Fluid within the tunica vaginalis.) Primary (associated with a patent 
processus vaginalis, which typically resolves during the 1st year of life) or second ary 
to testis tumour/trauma/infection. Primary hydro celes are more common, larger, 
and usually in younger men. Can resolve spontaneously. : Aspir ation (may need 
repeating) or surgery: plicating the tunica vaginalis (Lord’s repair)/inverting the sac 
(Jaboulay’s repair). Is the testis normal after aspiration? If any doubt, do US.
Epididymo-orchitis Causes: Chlamydia (eg if <35yrs); E. coli; mumps; N. gonorrh-
oeae; TB. Features: Sudden-onset tender swelling, dysuria, sweats/fever. Take ‘1st 
catch’ urine sample; look for urethral discharge. Consider STI screen. Warn of possi-
ble infertility and symptoms worsening before improving. : If <35yrs; doxycycline 
100mg/12h (covers chlamydia; treat sexual part ners). If gonorrhoea suspected add 
ceftriaxone 500mg IM stat. If >35yrs (mostly non-STI), associated UTI is common so 
try ciproﬂ oxacin 500mg/12h or oﬂ oxacin 200mg/12h. Antibiotics should be used for 
2–4wks. Also: analgesia, scrotal support, drainage of any abscess.
Varicocele Dilated veins of pampiniform plexus. Left side more commonly aff ect-
ed. Often visible as distended scrotal blood vessels that feel like ‘a bag of worms’. 
Patient may complain of dull ache. Associated with subfertility, but repair (via sur-
gery or embolization) seems to have little eff ect on subsequent pregnancy rates.
Haematocele Blood in tunica vaginalis, follows trauma, may need drainage/excision.
Testicular  tumours  The  commonest  malignancy  in    aged  15–44;  10%  occur  in 
undescended  testes,  even  after  orchidopexy.  A  contralateral  tumour  is  found  in 
5%. Types: Seminoma, 55% (30–65yrs); non-seminomatous germ cell tumour, 33% 
(NSGCT; previously teratoma; 20–30yrs); mixed germ cell tumour, 12%; lymphoma.
Signs: Typically painless testis lump, found after trauma/infection ± haemosperm-
ia,  secondary  hydrocele,  pain,  dyspnoea  (lung  mets),  abdominal  mass  (enlarged 
nodes), or eff ects of secreted hormones. 25% of seminomas & 50% of NSGCTS pre-
sent with metastases. Risk factors: Undescended testis; infant hernia; infertility.
Staging:  1  No  evidence  of  metastasis.  2  Infradiaphragmatic  node  involvement 
(spread via the para-aortic nodes not inguinal nodes). 3 Supra diaphragmatic node 
involvement. 4 Lung involvement (haematogenous).
Tests:  (Allow  staging.)  CXR,  CT, excision  biopsy. -FP  (eg  >3IU/mL)13  and  -hCG  are 
useful tumour markers and help monitor treatment (p531); check before & during .
:  Radical  orchidectomy  (inguinal  incision;  occlude  the  spermatic  cord  before 
mobilization  to  risk  of  intra-operative  spread).  Options  are  constantly  updated 
(surgery,  radiotherapy,  chemotherapy).  Seminomas  are  exquisitely  radiosensitive. 
Stage  1  seminomas:  orchidectomy  +  radiotherapy  cures  ~95%.  Do  close  follow-
up  to  detect  relapse.  Cure  of  NSGCT,  even  if  metast ases  are  present,  is  achieved 
by 3 cycles of bleomycin + etoposide + cisplatin. 5yr survival >90% in all groups. 
Encourage regular self-examination (prevents late presentation).

13  FP is not  in pure seminoma; may also be  in: hepatitis, cirrhosis, liver cancer, open neural tube defect.

_OHCM_10e.indb   650

_OHCM_10e.indb   650

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Diagnosing groin lumps: lateral to medial thinking 
  • Psoas abscess—may present with back pain, limp, and swinging pyrexia.
  • Neuroma of the femoral nerve.
  • Femoral artery aneurysm.
  • Saphena varix—like a hernia, it has a cough impulse.
  • Lymph node.
  • Femoral hernia.
  • Inguinal hernia.
  • Hydrocele or varicocele.
  • Also consider an undescended testis (cryptorchidism).

651

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.51  Diagnosis of scrotal masses. (*=transilluminates: position of pen torch shown in image).

_OHCM_10e.indb   651

_OHCM_10e.indb   651

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

652

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Torsion of the testis
The aim is to recognize this condition before the cardinal signs and symptoms are 
fully manifest, as prompt surgery saves testes. If surgery is performed in <6h the 
salvage rate is 90–100%; if >24h it is 0–10%.
If in any doubt, surgery is required. If suspected refer immediately to urology.
Symptoms: Sudden onset of pain in one testis, which makes walking uncomfortable. 
Pain in the abdomen, nausea, and vomiting are common.
Signs:  Inﬂ ammation  of  one  testis—it  is  very  tender,  hot,  and  swollen.  The  testis 
may lie high and transversely. Torsion may occur at any age but is most common at 
11–30yrs. With intermittent torsion the pain may have passed on presentation, but if 
it was severe, and the lie is horizontal, prophylactic ﬁ xing may be wise.
 : The main one is epididymo-orchitis (p650) but with this the patient tends to 
be older, there may be symptoms of urinary infection, and more gradual onset of 
pain. Also consider tumour, trauma, and an acute hydrocele. NB: torsion of testicular 
or epididymal appendage (the hydatid of Morgagni—a remnant of the Müllerian 
duct)—usually occurs between 7–12yrs, and causes less pain. Its tiny blue nodule 
may be discernible under the scrotum. It is thought to be due to the surge in gonado-
trophins which signal the onset of puberty. Idiopathic scrotal oedema is a benign 
condition usually between ages 2 and 10yrs, and is diff erentiated from torsion by the 
absence of pain and tenderness.
Tests:  Doppler  US may  demonstrate  lack  of  blood  ﬂ ow  to  testis.  Only  perform  if 
diagnosis equivocal—do not delay surgical exploration.
Treatment:  Ask  consent  for  possible  orchidectomy  +  bilateral  ﬁ xation  (orchi-
dopexy)—see p568. At surgery expose and untwist the testis. If its colour looks good, 
return it to the scrotum and ﬁ x both testes to the scrotum.

Undescended testes

Incidence About 3% of boys are born with at least one undescended testis (30% 
of premature boys) but this drops to 1% after the ﬁ rst year of life. Unilateral is four 
times more common than bilateral. (If bilateral then should have genetic testing.)
  • Cryptorchidism: Complete absence of the testis from the scrotum (anorchism is 

absence of both testes).

  • Retractile testis: The genitalia are normally developed but there is an excessive 
cremasteric reﬂ ex. The testis is often found at the external inguinal ring. : reassur-
ance (examining while in a warm bath, for example, may help to distinguish from 
maldescended/ectopic testes).

  • Maldescended testis: May be found anywhere along the normal path of descent 

from abdomen to groin.

  • Ectopic testis: Most commonly found in the superior inguinal pouch (anterior to 
the external oblique aponeurosis) but may also be abdominal, perineal, penile, and 
in the femoral triangle.

Complications of maldescended and ectopic testis Infertility; ≈40 increased risk 
of testicular cancer (risk remains after surgery but in cryptorchidism may be  if or-
chidopexy performed before aged 10),  increased risk of testicular trauma, increased 
risk of testicular torsion. Also associated with hernias (due to patent processus vagi-
nalis in >90%, p613) and other urinary tract anomalies.
Treatment of maldescended and ectopic testis restores (potential for) spermat-
ogenesis; the increased risk of malignancy remains but becomes easier to diagnose.
Surgery:  Orchidopexy,  usually  dartos  pouch  procedure,  is  performed  in  infancy: 
testis and cord are mobilized following a groin incision, any processus vaginalis or 
hernial sac is removed and the testis is brought through a hole made in the dartos 
muscle into the resultant subcutaneous pouch where the muscle prevents retraction.
Hormonal:  Hormonal  therapy,  most  commonly  human  chorionic  gonadotrophin 
(hCG), is sometimes attempted if an undescended testis is in the inguinal canal.

_OHCM_10e.indb   652

_OHCM_10e.indb   652

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

653

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

_OHCM_10e.indb   653

_OHCM_10e.indb   653

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

654

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Aneurysms of arteries
An artery with a dilatation >50% of its original diameter has an aneurysm; remem-
ber this is an ongoing process. True aneurysms are abnor mal dilatations that involve 
all layers of the arterial wall. False aneurysms (pseudoaneurysms) involve a collec-
tion of blood in the outer layer only (adventitia) which communicates with the lumen 
(eg after trauma). An eur ysms may be fusiform (eg most AAAS) or sac-like (eg Berry 
aneurysms; ﬁ g 10.17 p479).
Causes Atheroma, trauma, infection (eg mycotic aneurysm in endocarditis; tertiary 
syphilis—especially thoracic aneurysms), connective tissue disorders (eg Marfan’s, 
Ehlers–Danlos), inﬂ ammatory (eg Takayasu’s aortitis, p712).
Common sites Aorta (infrarenal most common), iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries.
Complications Rupture; thrombosis; embolism; ﬁ stulae; pressure on other structures.
Screening All  at age 65yr are invited for screening in  UK, decreases mortality 
from ruptured AAA. 
Ruptured  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  (AAA)  Death  rates/year  from  ruptured 
AAAS rise with age: 125 per million in those aged 55–59; 2728 per million if over 85yrs.
Symptoms & signs: Intermittent or continuous abdominal pain (radiates to back, iliac 
fossae, or groins; don’t dismiss this as renal colic), collapse, an expansile abdominal 
mass (it expands and contracts, unlike swellings that are purely pulsatile, eg nodes 
overlying arteries), and shock. If in doubt, assume a ruptured aneurysm.
Unruptured  AAA  Deﬁ nition:  >3cm  across.  Prevalence:  3%  of  those  >50yrs.   :  
>3 : 1. Less common in diabetics. Cause: Degeneration of elastic lamellae and smooth 
muscle loss. There is a genetic component. Symptoms: Often none, they may cause 
abdominal/back pain, often discovered incidentally on abdominal examination (see 
BOX). Monitoring: RCTS have failed to demonstrate beneﬁ t from early endovascular 
repair (EVAR, see later in paragraph) of aneurysms <5.5cm (where rupture rates are 
low). Risk of rupture below this size is <1%/yr, compared to ~25%/yr for aneurysms 
>6cm across. ~75% of aneurysms under monitoring will eventually need repair. Rup-
ture is more likely if: •BP •Smoker • •Positive family history. Modify risk factors if 
possible at diagnosis. Elective surgery: Reserve for aneurysms ≥5.5cm or expanding 
at >1cm/yr, or symptomatic aneurysms. Operative mortality: ~5%; complications in-
clude spinal or visceral ischaemia and distal emboli from dislodged thrombus debris. 
Studies show that age >80yrs should not, in itself, preclude surgery. Stenting (EVAR): 
Major surgery can be avoided by inserting an endovascular stent via the femoral 
artery.  EVAR has less early mortality but higher graft complications, eg failure of 
stent-graft to totally exclude blood ﬂ ow to the aneurysm—‘endoleak’. See ﬁ g 13.52.

Emergency management of a ruptured abdominal aneurysm
Mortality—treated: 41% and improving; untreated: ~100%.
 Summon a vascular surgeon and an experienced anaesthetist; warn theatre.
 Do an ECG, and take blood for amylase, Hb, crossmatch (10–40U may eventually 

be needed). Catheterize the bladder.

 Gain IV access with 2 large-bore cannulae. Treat shock with O RhΩve blood (if not 
cross matched), but keep systolic BP ≤100mmHg to avoid rupturing a contained 
leak (NB: raised BP is common early on).

 Take the patient straight to theatre. Don’t waste time on X-rays: fatal delay may 

result, though CT can help in a stable patient with an uncertain diagnosis.

 Give prophylactic antibiotics, eg co-amoxiclav 625mg IV.
 Surgery involves clamping the aorta above the leak, and inserting a Dacron® 
graft (eg ‘tube graft’ or, if signiﬁ cant iliac aneurysm also, a ‘trouser graft’ with 
each ‘leg’ attached to an iliac artery).

_OHCM_10e.indb   654

_OHCM_10e.indb   654

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Thoracic aortic dissection
Blood splits the aortic media with sudden tearing chest pain (± radiation to back). 
As  the  dissection  extends,  branches  of  the  aorta  occlude  sequentially  leading  to 
hemiplegia  (carotid  artery),  unequal  arm  pulses  and  BP, or  acute  limb  ischaemia, 
para plegia (anterior spinal artery), and anuria (renal arteries). Aortic valve incom-
petence, inferior MI, and cardiac arrest may develop if dissection moves proximally. 
Type A (70%) dissections involve the ascending aorta, irrespective of site of the tear, 
while if the ascending aorta is not involved it is called type B (30%). All patients 
with type A thoracic dissection should be considered for surgery: get urgent cardio-
thoracic advice. Deﬁ nitive treatment for type B is less clear and may be managed 
medically, with surgery reserved for distal dissections that are leaking, ruptured, or 
compromising vital organs. Management: •Crossmatch 10U blood. •ECG & CXR (exp-
anded mediast inum is rare). •CT or transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE). Take 
to  ITU;  hypotensives:  keep  systolic  at  ~100–110mmHg:  labetalol  (p140)  or  esmolol 
(t½ is ultra-short) by IVI is helpful here (calcium-channel blockers may be used if 
-blockers contraindicated). Acute operative mortality: <25%.

655

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig  13.52  Stenting:  not  an  open  or  closed 
case … this is a digital subtraction angiogram 
showing  correct  positioning  of  an  endovas-
cular  stent  at  the  end  of  the  procedure.  Al-
though  less  invasive  than  open  repair,  some 
are  unsuited  to  this  method,  owing  to  the 
anatomy  of  their  aneurysm.  Lifelong  moni-
toring is needed: stents may leak and the an-
eurysm progress (the risk can be reduced by 
coiling the internal iliac arteries, as shown).

Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

_OHCM_10e.indb   655

_OHCM_10e.indb   655

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

656

Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Occurs  due  to  atherosclerosis  causing  stenosis  of  arteries  (ﬁ g  13.53)  via  a  multi-
factorial  process  involving  modiﬁ able  and  non-modiﬁ able  risk  factors.  65%  have 
coexisting clinically relevant cerebral or coronary artery disease. Cardiovascular 
risk factors should be identiﬁ ed and treated aggressively. The chief feature of PAD is 
intermittent claudication (= to limp). Prevalence = 10%.
Symptoms Cramping pain in the calf, thigh, or buttock after walking for a given 
distance (the claudication distance) and relieved by rest (calf claudication suggests 
femoral disease while buttock claudication suggests iliac disease). Ulceration, gan-
grene (p660), and foot pain at rest—eg burning pain at night relieved by hanging legs 
over side of bed—are the cardinal features of critical ischaemia. Buttock claudica-
tion ± impotence imply Leriche’s syndrome (p704). Young, heavy smokers are at risk 
from Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans, p696).
Fontaine classiﬁ cation for PAD: 1 Asymptomatic. 2 Intermittent claudication. 3 Is-
chaemic rest pain. 4 Ulceration/gangrene (critical ischaemia).
Signs  Absent  femoral,  popliteal,  or  foot  pulses;  cold,  white  leg(s);  atrophic  skin; 
punched out ulcers (often painful); postural/dependent colour change; Buerger’s an-
gle (angle that leg goes pale when raised off  the couch) of <20° and capillary ﬁ lling 
time >15s are found in severe ischaemia.
Tests Exclude DM, arteritis (ESR/CRP). FBC (anaemia, polycythaemia); U&E (renal dis-
ease); lipids (dyslipidaemia); ECG (cardiac ischaemia). Do thrombophilia screen and 
serum homocysteine if <50 years. Ankle–brachial pressure index (ABPI): Normal = 
1–1.2; PAD = 0.5–0.9; critical limb ischaemia <0.5 or ankle systolic pressure <50mmHg. 
Beware falsely high results from incompressible calciﬁ ed vessels in severe athero-
sclerosis, eg DM.
Imaging Colour duplex US 1st line. If considering intervention MR/CT angiography 
(ﬁ g 13.54) for extent and location of stenoses and quality of distal vessels (‘run-off ’).
 1 Risk factor modiﬁ cation: Quit smoking (vital). Treat hypertension and high choles-
terol. Prescribe an antiplatelet agent (unless contraindicated), to prevent progression 
and to reduce cardiovascular risk. Clopidogrel is recommended as 1st-line.
2 Management of claudication: •Supervised exercise programmes reduce symp-
toms by improving collateral blood ﬂ ow (2h per wk for 3 months). Encourage patients 
to excercise to the point of maximal pain. •Vasoactive drugs, eg naftidrofuryl oxa-
late, off er modest beneﬁ t and are recommended only in those who do not wish to 
undergo revascularization and if exercise fails to improve symptoms.
If conservative measures have failed and PAD is severely aff ecting a patient’s life-
style or becoming limb-threatening, intervention is required.
  • Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is used for disease limited to a sin-
gle arterial segment (a balloon is inﬂ ated in the narrowed segment). 5-year paten-
cy is 79% (iliac) and 55% (femoral). Stents can be used to maintain artery patency.
  • Surgical reconstruction: If atheromatous disease is extensive but distal run-off  is 
good (ie distal arteries ﬁ lled by collateral vessels), consider arterial reconstruction 
with a bypass graft (ﬁ g 13.54). Procedures include femoral–popliteal bypass, femo-
ral–femoral crossover, and aorto–bifemoral bypass grafts. Autologous vein grafts 
are superior to prosthetic grafts (eg Dacron® or PTFE) when the knee joint is crossed.
  • Amputation  <3%  of  patients  with  intermittent  claudication  require  major  am-
putation within 5 years ( in diabetes, p212). Amputation may relieve intractable 
pain and death from sepsis and gangrene. A decision to amputate must be made 
by the patient, usually against a background of failed alternative strategies. The 
knee should be preserved where possible as it improves mobility and rehabilitation 
potential (this must be balanced with the need to ensure wound healing). Rehabili-
tation should be started early with a view to limb ﬁ tting. Gabapentin (regimen on 
p504) can be used to treat the gruelling complication of phantom limb pain.

  • Future  therapies:  Early-phase  clinical  trials  have  demonstrated  the  safety  and 
beneﬁ t of gene therapy (eg hepatocyte growth factor) in critical limb ischaemia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   656

_OHCM_10e.indb   656

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

(a)

(b)

657

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.53  Leg arteries.

Fig 13.54  CT an g iogram showing (a) normal lower limb 
vasculature and (b) heavily diseased arteries with previ-
ous left femoral anterior tibial bypass.

Reproduced from ‘Diagnosis and management of peripheral 
arterial disease’, BMJ, Peach et al., 345:e5208, 2012, with permis-
sion from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

Acute limb ischaemia
Surgical emergency requiring revascularization within 4–6h to save the limb. 
May be due to thrombosis in situ (~40%), emboli (38%), graft/angioplasty occlu-
sion (15%), or trauma. Thrombosis more likely in known ‘vasculopaths’; emboli are 
sudden, eg in those without previous vessel disease; they can aff ect multiple sites, 
and there may be a bruit. Mortality: 22%. Amputation rate: 16%.
  • Symptoms  and  signs:  The  6  ‘P’S  of  acute  ischaemia:  pale,  pulseless,  painful, 
paralysed, paraesthetic, and ‘perishingly cold’. Onset of ﬁ xed mottling implies 
irreversibility. Emboli commonly arise from the heart (AF; mural thrombus) or 
aneurysms. In patients with known  PAD, sudden deterioration of symptoms 
with deep duskiness of the limb may indicate acute arterial occlusion. This ap-
pearance is due to extensive pre–existing collaterals and must not be misdiag-
nosed as gout/cellulitis.

  • Management: This is an emergency and may require urgent open surgery or 
angioplasty. If diagnosis is in doubt, do urgent arteriography. If the occlusion 
is  embolic,  the  options  are  surgical  embolectomy  (Fogarty  catheter)  or  local 
thrombolysis, eg tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA, p345), balancing the risks of 
surgery with the haemorrhagic complications of thrombolysis.

  • Anticoagulate with heparin after either procedure and look for the source of 
emboli. Be aware of possible post-op reperfusion injury and subsequent com-
partment syndrome.

_OHCM_10e.indb   657

_OHCM_10e.indb   657

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

658

Varicose veins (V VS) 

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Long, tortuous, & dilated veins of the superﬁ cial venous system (see ﬁ g 13.55).
Pathology Blood from superﬁ cial veins of the leg passes into deep veins via perfora-
tor veins (perforate deep fascia) and at the saphenofemoral and saphenopopliteal 
junctions. Valves prevent blood from passing from deep to superﬁ cial veins. If they 
become incompetent there is venous hypertension and dilat ation of the superﬁ cial 
veins occurs. Risk factors: Prolonged standing, obesity, pregnancy, family history, 
and contraceptive pill. Causes: Primary mechanical factors (in ~95%); secondary to 
obstruction (eg DVT, fetus, pelvic tumour), arteriovenous malformations, overactive 
muscle pumps (eg cyclists); rarely congenital valve absence.
Symptoms ‘My legs are ugly.’ Pain, cramps, tingling, heaviness, and restless legs. 
But studies show these symptoms are only slightly commoner in those with VVS.
Signs  Oedema;  eczema;  ulcers;  haemosiderin;  haemorrhage;  phlebitis;  atrophie 
blanche (white scarring at the site of a previous, healed ulcer); lipodermatosclerosis 
(skin hardness from subcutaneous ﬁ brosis caused by chronic inﬂ ammation and fat 
necrosis). On their own VVS don’t cause DVTS (except possibly proximally spreading 
thrombophlebitis of the long saph enous vein).
Examination See p78.
Treatment NICE guidelines11 suggest that the criteria for specialist referral of pa-
tients with VVS should be: bleeding, pain, ulceration, superﬁ cial thrombophlebitis, or 
‘a severe impact on quality of life’ (ie not for cosmetic reasons alone).
  • Treat any underlying cause.
  • Education—avoid prolonged standing and elevate leg(s) whenever possible; sup-
port stockings (compliance is a problem); lose weight; regular walks (calf muscle 
action aids venous return).

  • Endovascular treatment (less pain and earlier return to activity than surgery.)

  • Radiofrequency ablation (VNUS Closure®)—a catheter is inserted into the vein 
and heated to 120°C destroying the endothelium and ‘closing’ the vein. Results 
are as good as conventional surgery at 3 months.

  • Endovenous  laser  ablation  (EVLA) is similar but uses a laser. Outcomes are 
similar to surgical repair after 2yrs (in terms of quality of life and recurrence).
  • Injection sclerotherapy—either liquid or foam can be used. Liquid sclerosant 
is indicated for varicosities below the knee if there is no gross saphenofemoral 
incompetence. It is injected at multiple sites and the vein compressed for a 
few  weeks  to  avoid  thrombosis  (intravascular  granulation  tissue  obliterates 
the lumen). Alternatively foam sclerosant is injected under ultrasound guid-
ance at a single site and spreads rapidly throughout the veins, damaging the 
endothelium. Ultrasound monitoring prevents inadvertent spread of foam into 
the femoral vein.  It achieves ~80% complete occlusion but is not more eff ective 
than liquid sclerotherapy or surgery.

  • Surgery—there are several choices, depending on vein anatomy and surgical 
preference,  eg  saphenofemoral  ligation  (Trendelenburg  procedure);  multi-
ple avulsions; stripping from groin to upper calf (stripping to the ankle is not 
needed, and may damage the saphenous nerve). Post-op: bandage legs tightly 
and elevate for 24h. Surgery is more eff ective than sclerotherapy in the long 
term. Before surgery and after venous mapping, ensure that all varicosities 
are indelibly marked to either side (to avoid tattooing if the incision is made 
through inked skin).

Saphena varix Dilatation in the saphenous vein at its conﬂ uence with the femoral 
vein (the SFJ). It transmits a cough impulse and may be mistaken for an inguinal or 
femoral hernia, but on closer inspection it may have a bluish tinge.

_OHCM_10e.indb   658

_OHCM_10e.indb   658

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

659

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Fig 13.55  The superﬁ cial veins of the leg.

When do varicose veins become an illness?
Perhaps when they hurt? Or is this too simple? ‘Certain illnesses are desirable: 
they provide a compensation for a functional disorder...’ (Albert Camus); this is 
known to be common with VVS. Perhaps many opt for surgery as a displacement 
activity to confronting deeper problems. We adopt the sickness role when we 
want sympathy. Somatization is hard to manage; here is one approach to consider:
  • Give time; don’t dismiss these patients as ‘just the “worried well” ’.
  • Explore factors perpetuating illness behaviour (misinformation, social stressors).
  • Agree a plan that makes sense to the patient’s holistic view of themself.
  • Treat any underlying depression (drugs and cognitive therapy, OHCS p344).

_OHCM_10e.indb   659

_OHCM_10e.indb   659

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

660

Gangrene and necrotizing fasciitis

Deﬁ nitions Gangrene is death of tissue from poor vascular supply and is a sign of 
critical ischaemia (see p656). Tissues are black and may slough. Dry gangrene is 
necrosis in the absence of infection. Note a line of demarcation between living and 
dead tissue.14 : restoration of blood supply ± amputation. Wet gangrene is tissue 
death and infection (associated with discharge) occurring together (p213, ﬁ g 5.10). 
: analgesia; broad-spectrum IV antibiotics; surgical debridement ± amputation. Gas 
gangrene is a subset of necrotizing myositis caused by spore-forming clostridial 
species. There is rapid onset of myonecrosis, muscle swelling, gas production, sepsis, 
and severe pain. Risk factors include diabetes, trauma, and malignancy. : remove 
all dead tissue (eg amputation). Give benzylpenicillin ± clindamycin. Hyperbaric O2           
can improve survival and  the number of debridements.
Necrotizing fasciitis is a rapidly progressive infection of the deep fascia causing 
necrosis of subcutaneous tissue. Prompt recognition (diffi  cult in the early stages) and 
aggressive treatment is required. In any atypical cellulitis, get early surgical help. 
There is intense pain over aff ected skin and underlying muscle. Group A -haemolytic 
streptococci is a major cause, although infection is often polymicrobial. Fournier’s gan-
grene is necrotizing fasciitis localized to the scrotum and perineum. : Radical debride-
ment ± amputation; IV antibiotics, eg benzylpenicillin and clindamycin.

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Skin ulcers

Ulcers are abnormal breaks in an epithelial surface. Leg ulcers aff ect ~2% in devel-
oped countries.
Causes May be multiple. For leg ulcers, venous disease accounts for 70%, mixed 
arterial and venous disease for 15%, and arterial disease alone for 2%. Other contrib-
utory factors include neuropathy (eg in DM), lymphoedema, vasculitis, malignancy 
(p596), infection (eg TB, syphilis), trauma (eg pressure sores: see ﬁ g 10.16, p473), pyo-
derma gangrenosum, drugs (eg nicorandil, hydroxyurea).
History Ask about number, pain, trauma. Explore comorbidities—eg VVS, peripheral 
arterial disease, diabetes, vasculitis. Length of history? Is the patient taking steroids? 
Are self-induced ulcers, dermatitis artefacta, a possibility? Has a biopsy been taken?
Examination Note features such as site, number, surface area, depth, edge, base, dis-
charge, lymphaden opathy, sensation, and healing (see BOX). If in the legs, note features 
of venous insuffi  ciency or arterial disease and, if possible, apply a BP cuff  to perform 
ankle–brachial pressure index (ABPI).
Tests  Skin  and  ulcer  biopsy  may  be  necessary—eg  to  assess  for  vasculitis  (will 
need  immunohistopathology)  or  malignant  change  in  an  established  ulcer  (Mar-
jolin’s ulcer = SCC presenting in chronic wound). If ulceration is the ﬁ rst sign of a 
suspected systemic disorder then further screening tests will be required.
Management Managing ulcers is often diffi  cult and expensive. Treat the cause(s) 
and focus on prevention. Optimize nutrition. Are there adverse risk factors (drug 
addiction, or risk factors for arteriopathy, eg smoking)? Get expert nursing care. 
Consider referral to specialist community nurse or leg ulcer/tissue viability clinic:
  • ‘Charing-Cross’ 4-layer compression bandaging is better than standard bandages 
(use only if arterial pulses  OK:  ABPI (p656) should be >0.8). Honey dressings can 
improve  healing  in  mild–moderate  burns,  but  as  an  adjuvant  to  compression 
bandaging for leg ulcers they do not signiﬁ cantly improve healing rate. Negative 
pressure wound therapy (eg VAC®) helps heal diabetic ulcers.

  • Surgery, larval therapy, and hydrogels are used to debride sloughy necrotic tis-

sue (avoid hydrogels in diabetic ulcers due to risk of wet gangrene).

Routine use of antibiotics does not improve healing. Only use if there is infection 
(not colonization).

14  ’The ﬁ rst sign of his approaching end was when one of my old aunts, while undressing him, removed 
a toe with one of his old socks.’ Graham Greene, A Sort of Life, 1971, Simon & Schuster.

_OHCM_10e.indb   660

_OHCM_10e.indb   660

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

661

y
r
e
g
r
u
S

Features of skin ulceration to note on examination
Site Above the medial malleolus (‘gaiter’ area) is the favourite place for venous 
ulcers (ﬁ g 13.56; mostly related to superﬁ cial venous disease, but may reﬂ ect venous 
hypertension via damage to the valves of the deep venous system, eg 2° to DVT). 
Venous hypertension leads to the development of superﬁ cial varicosities and skin 
changes (lipodermatosclerosis = induration, pigmentation, and inﬂ ammation of the 
skin). Minimal trauma to the leg leads to ulceration which often takes many months 
to heal. Ulcers on the sacrum, greater trochanter, or heel suggest pressure sores 
(OHCS p604), particularly if the patient is bed-bound with suboptimal nutrition.
Temperature The ulcer and surrounding tissues are cold in an ischaemic ulcer. If 
the skin is warm and well perfused then local factors are more likely.
Surface area Draw a map of the area to quantify and time any healing (a wound 
>4wks old is a chronic ulcer as distinguished from an acute wound).
Shape Oval, circular (cigarette burns), serpiginous (Klebsiella granulomatis, p412); 
unusual morphology can be secondary to mycobacterial infection, eg cutaneous 
tuberculosis or scrofuloderma (tuberculosis colliquativa cutis, where an infected 
lymph node ulcerates through to the skin).
Edge Shelved/sloping ≈ healing; punched-out ≈ ischaemic or syphilis; rolled/evert-
ed ≈ malignant; undermined ≈ TB.
Base Any muscle, bone, or tendon destruction (malignancy; pressure sores; is-
chaemia)? There may be a grey-yellow slough, beneath which is a pale pink base. 
Slough is a mixture of ﬁ brin, cell breakdown products, serous exudate, leucocytes, 
and bacteria—it need not imply infection, and can be part of the normal wound 
healing process. Granulation tissue is a deep pink gel-like matrix contained within 
a ﬁ brous collagen network and is evidence of a healing wound.
Depth If not uncomfortable for the patient (eg in neuropathic ulceration), a probe 
can be used to gauge how deep the ulceration extends.
Discharge Culture before starting any antibiotics (which usually don’t work). A 
watery discharge is said to favour TB; bleeding can ≈ malignancy.
Associated lymphadenopathy Suggests infection or malignancy.
Sensation Decreased sensation around the ulcer implies neuropathy.
Position  in  phases  of  extension/healing  Healing  is  heralded  by  granulation, 
scar formation, and epithelialization. Inﬂ amed margins ≈ extension.

Fig 13.56  Venous ulcer in the gaiter area in an obese woman.

Reproduced from Burge et al., Oxford Handbook of Medical Dermatology, 2016, with permission from 
Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   661

_OHCM_10e.indb   661

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

14  Clinical chemistry

Contents
On being normal in the society of 

numbers  662

The essence of laboratory 

medicine  663

Biochemistry: some major disease 

patterns 664

Lab results: act NOW  665
Fluid balance and IV ﬂ uid therapy  666
Electrolyte physiology and the 

kidney  668

Acid–base balance  670
Hyper- and hyponatraemia  672
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH 

secretion (SIADH)  673

Hyper- and hypokalaemia  674
Calcium and phosphate 

physiology  676
Hypercalcaemia  676
Hypocalcaemia  678
Phosphate, magnesium, zinc,

and selenium  679

Urate and the kidney  680
Metabolic bone diseases
  Osteoporosis  682
  Osteomalacia  684
  Paget’s disease of bone  685
Plasma proteins  686
Urinary proteins  686
Plasma enzymes  688
Hyperlipidaemia  690
The porphyrias  692

Fig  14.1  Rosalyn  Yalow  (1921–2011).  Trained 
in nuclear physics, and made good use of this 
when  she  developed  the  radioimmunoassay 
technique to allow trace amounts of peptides 
to be measured in serum using antibodies. This 
revolutionized  laboratory  medicine,  making 
reliable assays for hormones widely available, 
and underpinned the development of endocri-
nology. It was also employed to screen blood 
against  a  range  of  pathogens,  and  the  tech-
nique  is  still  commonly  used  today.  She  was 
awarded the Nobel prize for her work in 1977, 
and  commented  to  a  group  of  children  that: 
‘Initially,  new  ideas  are  rejected…Later  they 
become  dogma,  if  you’re  right.  And  if  you’re 
really lucky you can publish your rejections as 
part of your Nobel presentation.’

On being normal in the society of numbers

Laboratory medicine reduces our patients to a few easy-to-handle numbers: this is 
the discipline’s great attraction—and its greatest danger. The normal range (refer-
ence interval) is usually that which includes 95% of a given population (given a nor-
mal distribution, see p750). If variation is randomly distributed, 2.5% of our results 
will be ‘too high’, and 2.5% ‘too low’ on an average day, when dealing with apparently 
normal people. This statistical deﬁ nition of normality is the simplest. Other deﬁ ni-
tions may be normative—ie stating what an upper or lower limit should be. The 
upper end of the reference interval for plasma cholesterol may be given as 6mmol/L 
because this is what biochemists state to be the desired maximum. 40% of people 
in some populations will have a plasma cholesterol greater than 6mmol/L and thus 
may be at increased risk. The WHO deﬁ nition of anaemia in pregnancy is an Hb of 
<110g/L, which makes 20% of mothers anaemic. This ‘lax’ criterion has the presumed 
beneﬁ t of triggering actions that result in fewer deaths from haemorrhage. So do 
not just ask ‘What is the normal range?’—also enquire about who set the range, for 
what population, and for what reason.

We thank Dr Petra Sulentic, our Specialist Reader, for her contribution to this chapter. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   662

_OHCM_10e.indb   662

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

The essence of laboratory medicine

663

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

General principles
  • Laboratory testing may contribute to four aspects of medicine:

  • diagnosis (eg TSH in hypothyrodism)
  • prognosis (eg clotting in liver failure)
  • monitoring disease activity or progression (eg creatinine in chronic kidney disease)
  • screening (eg phenylketonuria in newborn babies).

  • Only do a test if the result will inﬂ uence management. Make sure you look at the 

result.

  • Always interpret laboratory results in the context of the patient's clinical picture.
  • If a result does not ﬁ t with the clinical picture, trust clinical judgement and repeat 
the test. Could it be an artefact? The ‘normal’ range for a test (reference interval) 
is usually deﬁ ned as the interval, symmetrical about the mean, containing 95% of 
results in a given population (p751). The more tests you run, the greater the prob-
ability of an ‘abnormal’ result of no signiﬁ cance (see p751).

  • Laboratory staff  like to have contact with you. They are an excellent source of help 

and information for both requests and results.

  • Involve the patient. Don’t forget to explain to them where the test ﬁ ts into their 

overall management plan.

Getting the best out of the lab—a laboratory decalogue

1      Interest someone from the laboratory in your patient’s problem.
2      Fill in the request form fully.
3      Give clinical details, not your preferred diagnosis.
4      Ensure that the lab knows who to contact.
5      Label specimens as well as the request form.
6      Follow the hospital labelling routine for crossmatching.
7      Find out when analysers run, especially batched assays.
8      Talk with the lab before requesting an unusual test.
9      Be thoughtful: at 16:30h the routine results are being sorted.
10      Plot results graphically: abnormalities show sooner.
Artefacts and pitfalls in laboratory tests
  • Do not take blood samples from an arm that has IV ﬂ uid running into it.
  • Repeat any unexpected and inconsistent result before acting on it.
  • For clotting time do not sample from a heparinized IV catheter.
  • Serum K+ is overestimated if the sample is old or haemolysed (this occurs if vene-

puncture is diffi  cult).

  • If using Vacutainers, ﬁ ll plain tubes ﬁ rst—otherwise, anticoagulant contam ination 

from previous tubes can cause errors.

  • Total calcium results are aff ected by albumin concentration (p676).
  • INR may be overestimated if citrate bottles are underﬁ lled.
  • Drugs may cause analytic errors (eg prednisolone cross-reacts with cortisol). Be 

suspicious if results are unexpected.

  • Food may aff ect result, eg bananas raise urinary HIAA (p271).

Ford Madox Ford 1915 'The Good Soldier'
Normal values can have hidden historical, social, and political desiderata—just like 
the normal values novelists ascribe to their characters: ‘Conventions and tradi-
tions I suppose work blindly but surely for the preservation of the normal type; 
for the extinction of proud, resolute and unusual individuals… Society must go 
on, I suppose, and society can only exist if the normal, if the virtuous, and the 
slightly-deceitful ﬂ ourish, and if the passionate, the headstrong, and the too-
truthful are condemned to suicide and to madness. Yes, society must go on; it 
must breed, like rabbits. That is what we are here for … But, at any rate, there 
is always Leonora to cheer you up; I don’t want to sadden you. Her husband is 
quite an economical person of so normal a ﬁ gure that he can get quite a large 
proportion of his clothes ready-made. That is the great desideratum of life.’

Oxford World's Classics, pp181–92

_OHCM_10e.indb   663

_OHCM_10e.indb   663

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
664

Biochemistry—some major disease patterns

Dehydration Urea (disproportionate relative to smaller  in creatinine),1 albumin 
(also useful to plot change in a patient’s con dition), haematocrit (PCV); also urine 
volume and skin turgor.
Abnormal kidney function There are two major biochemical pictures (table 14.1):
Low  GFR: Usually oliguric.  Causes: early acute oliguric renal failure (p298), chronic 
kidney disease (p302). In chronic kidney disease also Hb, PTH, and renal bone disease.
Tubular dysfunction: Results from damage to tubules. Diagnosis is made by test-
ing renal concentrating ability (p241). May be polyuric with urinary glucose, amino 
acids, proteins (lysozyme, 2-microglobulin), or phosphate. Causes: recovery from 
acute kidney injury, hypercalcaemia, hyperuric aemia, myeloma, pyelonephritis, hy-
pokalaemia, Wilson’s disease, galactosaemia, and heavy metal poisoning.

Table 14.1  Biochemical proﬁ le in abnormal kidney function

Urea & creatinine
K+ & urate
H+
Ω
HCO3
3Ω
PO4
Ca2+

Low GFR







Tubular dysfunction
Normal




Normal

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Thiazide and loop diuretics Na+, K+, HCO 3
Bone disease See table 14.2 for typical biochemical patterns.
Table 14.2  Serum biomarkers in common diseases of bone
3Ω

Ω,  urea.

Osteoporosis (p682)
Osteomalacia (p684)
Paget’s
Myeloma
Bone metastases
1° Hyperparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism
Renal failure (low GFR)

Ca2+
Normal

Normal






PO4
Normal

Normal
, normal
, normal
, normal



ALP
Normal


Normal

Normal, 
Normal
Normal, 

Hepatocellular  disease  Bilirubin,  AST,  ALP    slightly,  albumin.  Also  clotting 
times. For details of the diff erences between AST and ALT, see p291.
Cholestasis Bilirubin, GT, ALP, AST.
Excess alcohol intake Evidence of hepatocellular disease. Early evidence if GT, 
MCV, and ethanol in blood before lunch.
Myocardial infarction Troponin, CK, AST, LDH (p118).
Addison’s disease K+, Na+, urea.
Cushing’s syndrome May show K+, HCO3
Conn’s syndrome May show K+, HCO3
Ω if acidotic).
Diabetes mellitus Glucose, (HCO3
Diabetes insipidus Na+, plasma osmolality, urine osmolality. (Both hypercalcae-
mia and hypokalaemia may cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.)
Inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH) (See p673.) Na+ with  urea and creatinine, 
plasma osmolality. Urine osmolality (>plasma osmolality), urine Na+ (>20mmol/L).
Some  immunodeﬁ ciency  states  Normal  serum  albumin  but  low  total  protein 
(because immunoglobulins are missing. Also makes crossmatching diffi  cult because 
expected haemagglutinins are absent; OHCS p198).

Ω. Na+ normal or . (Also hypertension.)

Ω, Na+.

1  Dehydration aff ects urea more than creatinine because in dehydration a greater proportion of ﬁ ltered 
urea is reabsorbed by the kidney. Creatinine is hardly reabsorbed at all.

_OHCM_10e.indb   664

_OHCM_10e.indb   664

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
665

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

 Laboratory results: when to take action NOW
  • On receiving a dangerous result, ﬁ rst check the name and date.
  • Go  to  the  bedside.  If  the  patient  is  conscious,  turn  off   any  IVI  (until  ﬂ uid  is 
checked: a mistake may have been made) and ask the patient how he or she is. 
Any ﬁ ts, faints, collapses, or unexpected symptoms?

  • Be sceptical of an unexpectedly, wildly abnormal result with a well patient. Com-
pare with previous values. Could the specimens have got muddled up; whose is 
it? Is there an artefact? Was the sample taken from the ‘drip’ arm? Is a low cal-
cium due to a low albumin (p676)? Perhaps the lab is using a new analyser with a 
faulty wash cycle? When in doubt, seek help and repeat the test.

The following values are somewhat arbitrary and must be taken as a guide only. 
Many results less extreme than those listed will be just as dangerous if the patient 
is old, immunosuppressed, or has some other pathology such as pneumonia.
Plasma biochemistry:
The main risks when plasma electrolytes are dangerously abnormal (table 14.3) 
are of cardiac arrhythmias and CNS events such as seizures.
Table 14.3  Dangerous levels of the common serum elecrolytes

Electrolyte
Na+
K+
Corrected Ca2+
Glucose

Lower limit
<120mmol/L
<2.5mmol/L
<2.0mmol/L
<2.0mmol/L

Upper limit
>155mmol/L
>6.5mmol/L
>3.5mmol/L
>20mmol/L

Relevant pages
p672
p674, p301
p676, p678
p832, p834

Blood gases:
  • PaO2 <8.0kPa = Severe hypoxia. Give O2. See p188.
  • pH <7.1 = Dangerous acidosis. See p670 to determine the cause.
Haematology results:
  • Hb <70g/L with low mean cell volume (<75fL) or history of bleeding. This pa-
tient may need urgent transfusion (no spare capacity)—ask about symptoms, 
co-morbidities, and baseline Hb. Check haematinics before transfusion. See p324.

  • Platelets <40≈109/L. May need a platelet transfusion; call a haematologist.
  • Plasmodium falciparum seen on blood ﬁ lm. Start antimalarials now. See p418.
  • ESR >30mm/h + headache. Could there be giant cell arteritis? See p556.
CSF results:
 Never delay treatment when bacterial meningitis is suspected.
  • >1 neutrophil/mm3. Is there meningitis: usually >1000 neutrophils? See p822.
  • Positive Gram stain. Talk to a microbiologist; urgent blind therapy. See p822.
Conﬂ icting, equivocal, or inexplicable results: Get prompt help.

_OHCM_10e.indb   665

_OHCM_10e.indb   665

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
666

Fluid balance and IV ﬂ uid therapy

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Fluid requirement Roughly 2–2.5L in a normal person (~70kg) over 24h. Normal daily 
losses are through urine (1500mL), stool (200mL), and insensible losses (800mL). This 
requirement is normally met through food (1000mL) and drink (1500mL).
Intravenous ﬂ uids Given if suffi  cient ﬂ uids cannot be given orally. About 2–2.5L of 
ﬂ uid containing roughly 70mmol Na+ and 70mmol K+ per 24h are required.1 Thus, a 
good regimen is 2–2.5L of 0.18% glucose with sodium chloride with 20–30mmol of K+ 
per litre of ﬂ uid. Alternative routes are via a central venous line or subcutaneously. 
However, remember that all cannulae carry a risk of MRSA infection: femoral > jugular 
> subclavian > peripheral, so always resume oral ﬂ uid intake as soon as possible.
In a sick patient, don’t forget to include additional sources of ﬂ uid loss when calcu-
lating daily ﬂ uid requirements, such as drains, fevers, or diarrhoea (see BOX 'Special 
cases'). Daily weighing helps to monitor overall ﬂ uid balance, as will ﬂ uid balance 
charts.
Examine patients regularly to assess ﬂ uid balance (see BOX 'Assessing ﬂ uid bal-
ance').
Fluid compartments and types of IV ﬂ uid
For a 70kg man, total bodily ﬂ uid is ~42L (60% body weight). Of this, ⅔ is intracellular 
(28L) and ⅓ is extracellular (14L). Of the extracellular compartment, ⅓ is intravascu-
lar, ie blood (5L). Diff erent types of IV ﬂ uid will equilibrate with the diff erent ﬂ uid 
compartments depending on the osmotic content of the given ﬂ uid.
5%  glucose:  (=Dextrose.)  Isotonic,  but  contains  only  a  small  amount  of  glucose 
(50g/L) and so provides little energy (~10% daily energy per litre). The liver rapidly 
metabolizes all the glucose leaving only water, which rapidly equilibrates throughout 
all ﬂ uid compartments. It is, therefore, useless for ﬂ uid resuscitation (only 1/9 will 
remain in the intravascular space), but suitable for maintaining hydration. Excess 5% 
glucose IV may lead to water overload and hyponatraemia (p672).
0.9% saline: (‘Normal saline.’) Has about the same Na+ content as plasma (150mmol/L) 
and is isotonic with plasma. 0.9% saline will equilibrate rapidly throughout the extra-
cellular compartment only, and takes longer to reach the intracellular compartment 
than 5% glucose. It is, therefore, appropriate for ﬂ uid resuscitation, as it will remain 
predominantly  in  the  extracellular  space  (and  thus  ⅓  of  the  given  volume  in  the 
intravascular space), as well as for maintaining hydration. Hypertonic and hypotonic 
saline solutions are also available, but are for specialist use only.
Colloids: (eg Gelofusine®.) Have a high osmotic content similar to that of plasma 
and therefore remain in the intravascular space for longer than other ﬂ uids, making 
them appropriate for ﬂ uid resuscitation, but not for general hydration. Colloids are 
expensive, and may cause anaphylactic reactions. In reality, eff ective ﬂ uid resuscita-
tion will use a combination of colloid and 0.9% saline.
Hypertonic glucose (10% or 50%): May be used in the treatment of hypoglycaemia. 
It is irritant to veins, so care in its use is needed. Infusion sites should be inspected 
regularly, and ﬂ ushed with 0.9% saline after use.
Glucose with sodium chloride: (One-ﬁ fth ‘normal saline.’) Isotonic, containing 0.18% 
saline (30mmol/L of Na+) and 4% glucose (222mmol/L). It has roughly the quantity of 
Na+ required for normal ﬂ uid maintenance, when given 10-hourly in adults, but is now 
most commonly used in a paediatric setting.
Hartmann’s  solution:  Contains  Na+  131mmol,  ClΩ  111mmol,  lactate  29mmol,  K+ 
Ω 29mmol, and Ca2+ 2mmol per litre of ﬂ uid. It is an alternative to 0.9% 
5mmol, HCO3
saline, and some consider it more physiological. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   666

_OHCM_10e.indb   666

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
667

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Assessing ﬂ uid balance
Underﬁ lled:
  • Tachycardia
  • Postural drop in BP (low BP is a late 

Overﬁ lled:
  • JVP (p43)
  • Pitting oedema of the sacrum, ankles, or 

sign of hypovolaemia)

even legs and abdomen

  • capillary reﬁ ll time
  • urine output
  • Cool peripheries
  • Dry mucous membranes
  • skin turgor
  • Sunken eyes.
The JVP is a substitute marker of central venous pressure, and when assessing ﬂ uid 
balance is diffi  cult, a CVP line may help to guide ﬂ uid management.

  • Tachypnoea
  • Bibasal crepitations
  • Pulmonary oedema on CXR (ﬁ g 16.3, p723).
See also p134 for signs of heart failure.

Special cases
Acute blood loss: Resuscitate with colloid or 0.9% saline via large-bore cannulae 
until blood is available.
Children: Use glucose with sodium chloride for ﬂ uid maintenance: 100mL/kg for 
the ﬁ rst 10kg, 50mL/kg for the next 10kg, and 20mL/kg thereafter—all per 24h.
Elderly: May be more prone to ﬂ uid overload, so use IV ﬂ uids with care (smaller 
ﬂ uid bolus).
GI losses: (Diarrhoea, vomiting, NG tubes, etc.) Replace lost K+ as well as lost ﬂ uid 
volume.
Heart failure: Use IV ﬂ uids with care to avoid ﬂ uid overload (p134).
Liver  failure: Patients often have a raised total body sodium, so use salt-poor 
albumin or blood for resuscitation, and avoid 0.9% saline for maintenance.
Acute  pancreatitis:  Aggressive  ﬂ uid  resuscitation  is  required  due  to  large 
amounts of sequestered ‘third-space’ ﬂ uid (p636).
Poor urine output: Aim for >1 mL/kg/h; the minimum is >0. 5mL/kg/h. Give a ﬂ uid
challenge, eg 500mL 0.9% saline over 1h (or half this volume in heart failure or the 
elderly), and recheck the urine output. If not catheterized, exclude retention; if 
catheterized, ensure the catheter is not blocked!
Post-operative: Check the operation notes for intraoperative losses, and ensure 
you chart and replace added losses from drains, etc.
Shock: Resuscitate with colloid or 0.9% saline via large-bore cannulae. Identify 
the type of shock (p790).
Transpiration losses: (Fever, burns.) Beware the large amounts of ﬂ uid that can 
be lost unseen through transpiration. Severe burns in particular may require ag-
gressive ﬂ uid resuscitation (p846).

Potassium in IV ﬂ uids
  • Potassium ions can be given with 5% glucose or 0.9% saline, usually 20mmol/L 

or 40mmol/L.

  • K+ may be retained in renal failure, so beware giving too much IV.
  • Gastrointestinal ﬂ uids are rich in K+, so increased ﬂ uid loss from the gut (eg 
diarrhoea, vomiting, high-output stoma, intestinal ﬁ stula) will need increased 
K+ replacement.

The maximum concentration of K+ that is safe to infuse via a peripheral line is 
40mmol/L, at a maximum rate of 20mmol/h in a cardiac monitored patient. Fluid-
restricted patients may require higher concentrations or rates in life-threatening 
hypokalaemia.  Faster  rates  risk  cardiac  dysrhythmias  and  asystole,  and  higher 
concentrations thrombophlebitis, depending on the size of the vein, so give con-
centrated solutions >40mmol/L via a central venous catheter, and use ECG moni-
toring for rates >10mmol/h. For symptoms and signs of hyper- and hypokalaemia 
see p674.

_OHCM_10e.indb   667

_OHCM_10e.indb   667

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
668

Electrolyte physiology and the kidney

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

The kidney Controls the homeostasis of a number of serum electrolytes (includ-
ing Na+, K+, Ca2+, and PO4
3Ω), helps to maintain acid–base balance, and is responsible 
for the excretion of many substances. It also makes erythropoietin and renin, and 
hydroxylates 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-di hydroxy vitamin D (see p676 for Ca2+ and 
3Ω physiology). All of these functions can be aff ected in chronic kidney disease 
PO4
(p302), but it is the biochemical eff ects of kidney failure that are used to monitor 
disease progression.
The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system Plasma is ﬁ ltered by the glomeruli, 
and Na+, K+, H+, and water are reabsorbed from this ﬁ ltrate under the control of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. Renin is released from the juxtaglomerular 
apparatus (ﬁ g 7.13, p316) in response to low renal ﬂ ow and raised sympathetic tone, 
and catalyses the conversion of angiotensinogen (a peptide made by the liver) to 
angiotensin I. This is then converted by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), which 
is located throughout the vascular tree, to angiotensin II. The latter has several 
important actions including eff erent renal arteriolar constriction (thus perfusion 
pressure), peripheral vaso constriction, and stimulation of the adrenal cortex to pro-
duce aldosterone, which activates the Na+/K+ pump in the distal renal tubule leading 
to reabsorption of Na+ and water from the urine, in exchange for K+ and H+. Glucose 
spills over into the urine when the plasma concentration > renal threshold for reab-
sorption (≈10mmol/L, but this varies between people, and is  in pregnancy).
Control of sodium Control is through the action of aldosterone on the distal con-
voluted tubule (DCT) and collecting duct to increase Na+ reabsorption from the urine. 
The natriuretic peptides ANP, BNP, and CNP (p137) contribute to Na+ homeostasis by 
reducing Na+ reabsorption from the DCT and inhibiting renin. A high GFR (see later in 
this topic) results in increased Na+ loss, and high renal tubular ﬂ ow and haemodilu-
tion decrease Na+ reabsorption in the proximal tubule.
Control of potassium Most K+ is intracellular, and thus serum K+ levels are a poor 
reﬂ ection of total body potassium. The concentrations of K+ and H+ in extracellular 
ﬂ uid tend to vary together. This is because these ions compete with each other in the 
exchange with Na+ that occurs across most cell membranes and in the distal con-
voluted tubule of the kidney, where Na+ is reabsorbed from the urine. Thus, if the H+ 
concentration is high, less K+ will be excreted into the urine. Similarly, K+ will compete 
with H+ for exchange across cell membranes and extracellular K+ will accumulate. 
Insulin and catecholamines both stimulate K+ uptake into cells by stimulating the 
Na+/K+ pump.
Serum osmolality A laboratory measurement of the number of osmoles per kilo-
gram of solvent. It is approximated by serum osmolarity (the number of osmoles 
per litre of solution) using the equation 2(Na+ + K+) + Urea + Glucose, since these are 
the predominant serum electrolytes. Normal serum osmolarity is 280–300mmol/L, 
which  will  always  be  a  little  less  than  the  laboratory-measured  osmolality—the 
osmolar gap. However, if the osmolar gap is greater than 10mmol/L, this indicates 
the presence of additional solutes: consider diabetes mellitus or high blood ethanol, 
methanol, mannitol, or ethylene glycol.
Control of water Control is mainly via serum Na+ concentration, since water intake 
and loss are regulated to hold the extracellular concentration of Na+ constant. Raised 
plasma osmolality (eg dehydration or glucose in diabetes mellitus) causes thirst 
through  the  hypothalamic  thirst  centre  and  the  release  of  antidiuretic  hormone 
(ADH)  from  the  posterior  pituitary.  ADH  increases  the  passive  water  reabsorption 
from the renal collecting duct by opening water channels to allow water to ﬂ ow 
from the hypotonic luminal ﬂ uid into the hypertonic renal interstitium. Low plasma 
osmolality inhibits ADH secretion, thus reducing renal water reabsorption.
Glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (GFR) Deﬁ ned as the volume of ﬂ uid ﬁ ltered by the glo-
meruli per minute (units mL/min), and is one of the primary measures of disease 
progression in chronic kidney disease. It can be estimated in a number of diff erent 
ways (see BOX).

_OHCM_10e.indb   668

_OHCM_10e.indb   668

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
669

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Estimating GFR
Calculating GFR is useful because it is a more sensitive indication of the degree 
of renal impairment than serum creatinine. Subjects with low muscle mass (eg 
the elderly, women) can have a ‘normal’ serum creatinine, despite a signiﬁ cant 
reduction in GFR. This can be important when prescribing nephrotoxic drugs, or 
drugs that are renally excreted, which may therefore accumulate to toxic levels 
in the serum.

A number of methods for estimating GFR exist, all relying on a calculation of 
the clearance of a substance that is renally ﬁ ltered and then not reabsorbed in 
the renal tubule. For example, the rate of clearance of creatinine can be used as a 
marker for the rate of ﬁ ltration of ﬂ uid and solutes in the glomerulus because it is 
only slightly reabsorbed from the renal tubule. The more of the ﬁ ltered substance 
that is reabsorbed, however, the less accurate the estimate of GFR.
MDRD  (Modiﬁ cation  of  Diet  in  Renal  Disease  Study  Group): This provides an 
estimate of GFR from four simple parameters: serum creatinine, age, gender, and 
race (black/non-black). It is one of the best validated for monitoring patients with 
established moderately severe renal impairment,2 and most labs now routinely 
report estimated GFR (eGFR) using the MDRD equation on all U&E reports:
eGFR  =  32 788 ≈ serum creatinineΩ1 . 154 ≈ ageΩ0 . 203 ≈ [1 . 212 if black] ≈ [0 . 742 if female]
However, a number of caveats exist, so that it is best used in monitoring declin-
ing renal function rather than labelling elderly patients with mild renal impairment:
  • It is not validated for mild renal impairment, and therefore its use for screening 

general populations is questionable.

  • Inter-individual  variations  (and  thus  conﬁ dence  intervals)  are  wide,  although 
for each individual variations are small so that a decline in eGFR over a number of 
serum samples is always signiﬁ cant.

  • Single results may be aff ected by variations in serum creatinine, such as after a 

protein-rich meal.

Cockcroft–Gault equation: This provides an estimate of creatinine clearance. It 
is an improvement on the MDRD equation because it also takes into account the 
patient’s weight. However, 10% of creatinine is actively excreted in the tubules, 
and  therefore  creatinine  clearance  overestimates  true  GFR  and  underestimates 
renal impairment. Moreover, the equation assumes ideal body weight and is thus 
unreliable in the obese or oedematous. Also unreliable in unstable renal function.
(140 Ω age) ≈ weight (kg) ≈ [0 . 85 if female] ≈ [1 . 212 if black]
0 . 813 ≈ serum creatinine (μmol/L)

Creatinine clearance  = 

Creatinine clearance can also be calculated by measuring the excreted creatinine 
in a 24h urine collection and comparing it with the serum creatinine concentra-
tion. However, the accuracy of collection is vital but often poor, making this an 
unreliable and inconvenient method.

GFR can also be measured by injection of a radioisotope followed by sequential 
blood sampling (51Cr-EDTA) or by an isotope scan (eg DTPA 99Tc, p190). These meth-
ods allow a more accurate estimate of GFR than creatinine clearance, since smaller 
proportions of these substances are reabsorbed in the tubules. They also have the 
advantage of being able to provide split renal function.
Inulin clearance: The gold standard for calculating GFR, because 100% of ﬁ ltered 
inulin (not insulin) is retained in the luminal ﬂ uid and therefore reﬂ ects exactly the 
rate of ﬁ ltration of water and solutes in the glomerulus. However, measuring inulin 
clearance again requires urine collection over several hours, and also a constant IV 
infusion of inulin, and is therefore inconvenient to perform.

_OHCM_10e.indb   669

_OHCM_10e.indb   669

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
670

Acid–base balance

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Arterial blood pH is closely regulated in health to 7.40 ± 0.05 by various mechanisms 
including bicarbonate, other plasma buff ers such as deoxygenated haemoglobin, and 
the kidney. Acid–base disorders needlessly confuse many people, but if a few simple 
rules are applied, then interpretation and diagnosis are easy. The key principle is 
that primary changes in HCO3
A simple method

Ω are metabolic and in CO2 respiratory. See ﬁ g 14.2.

1      Look at the pH, is there an acidosis or alkalosis?
  • pH <7.35 is an acidosis; pH >7.45 is an alkalosis.
2      Is the CO2 abnormal? (Normal range 4.7–6.0kPa.)

If so, is the change in keeping with the pH?
  • CO2 is an acidic gas—is CO2 raised with an acidosis, lowered with an alkalosis? 
If so, it is in keeping with the pH and thus caused by a respiratory problem. If 
there is no change, or an opposite one, then the change is compensatory.
Ω abnormal? (Normal concentration 22–28mmol/L.)

3      Is the HCO3

If so, is the change in keeping with the pH?
  • HCO3

Ω is alkaline—is HCO3

Ω raised with an alkalosis, lowered with an acidosis? 

If so, the problem is a metabolic one.

4      Is the PaO2 abnormal? Interpret in the context of the FiO2.

Ω

Ω falls 

Ω 8.0mmol/L. 
An example Your patient’s blood gas shows: pH 7.05, CO2 2.0kPa, HCO3
Ω 
There is an acidosis. The CO2 is low, and thus it is a compensatory change. The HCO3
is low and is thus the primary change, ie a metabolic acidosis.
The anion gap Estimates unmeasured plasma anions (‘ﬁ xed’ or organic acids such 
as phosphate, ketones, and lactate—hard to measure directly). It is calculated as the 
diff erence between plasma cations (Na+ and K+) and anions (ClΩ and HCO3
Ω). Normal 
range: 10–18mmol/L. It is helpful in determining the cause of a metabolic acidosis.
Metabolic acidosis pH, HCO3
Causes of metabolic acidosis and an increased anion gap:
Due to increased production, or reduced excretion, of ﬁ xed/organic acids. HCO3
and unmeasured anions associated with the acids accumulate.
  • Lactic acid (shock, infection, tissue ischaemia).
  • Urate (renal failure).
  • Ketones (diabetes mellitus, alcohol).
  • Drugs/toxins (salicylates, biguanides, ethylene glycol, methanol).
Causes of metabolic acidosis and a normal anion gap:
Due to loss of bicarbonate or ingestion of H+ ions (ClΩ is retained).
  • Renal tubular acidosis.
  • Diarrhoea.
  • Drugs (acetazolamide).
  • Addison’s disease.
  • Pancreatic ﬁ stula.
  • Ammonium chloride ingestion.
Metabolic alkalosis pH, HCO3
  • Vomiting.
  • K+ depletion (diuretics).
  • Burns.
  • Ingestion of base.
Respiratory acidosis pH, CO2
  • Type 2 respiratory failure due to any lung, neuromuscular, or physical cause (p188).
  • Most commonly chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Look at the PaO2. 
It will probably be low. Is oxygen therapy required? Use controlled O2 (Venturi 
connector) if COPD is the underlying cause, as too much oxygen may make matters 
worse (p189).

Ω

 Beware exhaustion in asthma, pneumonia, and pulmonary oedema, which can pre-
sent with this picture when close to respiratory arrest. A normal or high PaCO2 is 
worrying. These patients require urgent ITU review for ventilatory support.

_OHCM_10e.indb   670

_OHCM_10e.indb   670

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Respiratory alkalosis pH, CO2
A result of hyperventilation of any cause. CNS causes: Stroke; subarachnoid bleed; 
meningitis. Others: Mild/moderate asthma; anxiety; altitude; T°; pregnancy; pulmo-
nary emboli (reﬂ ex hyperventilation); drugs, eg salicylates.
Terminology To aid understanding, we have used the terms acidosis and alkalosis, 
where a purist would sometimes have used acidaemia and alkalaemia. Technically 
acidaemia is the state of having a low blood pH, whereas acidosis refers to the pro-
cesses which generate H+, leading to the acidaemia.

671

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Fig 14.2  The shaded area represents normality. This method is very power-
ful. The result represented by point ≈, for example, indicates that the acidosis 
is in part respiratory and in part metabolic. Seek a cause for each.

_OHCM_10e.indb   671

_OHCM_10e.indb   671

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
672

H ypernatraemia

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Signs and symptoms Lethargy, thirst, weakness, irritability, confusion, coma, and 
ﬁ ts, along with signs of dehydration (p666). Laboratory features: Na+, PCV, alb, 
urea.
Causes
Usually due to water loss in excess of Na+ loss:
  • Fluid loss without water replacement (eg diarrhoea, vomit, burns).
  • Diabetes insipidus (p240). Suspect if large urine volume. This may follow head in-

jury, or CNS surgery, especially pituitary.

  • Osmotic diuresis (for diabetic coma, see p832).
  • Primary aldosteronism: rarely severe, suspect if BP, K+, alkalosis (HCO3
  • Iatrogenic: incorrect IV ﬂ uid replacement (excessive saline).
Management Give water orally if possible. If not, give glucose 5% IV slowly (1L/6h) 
guided by urine output and plasma Na+. Use 0.9% saline IV if hypovolaemic, since 
this causes less marked ﬂ uid shifts and is hypotonic in a hypertonic patient. Avoid 
hypertonic solutions.

Ω).

H yponatraemia

Plasma  Na+  concentration  depends  on  the  amount  of  both  Na+  and  water  in  the 
plasma. Hyponatraemia therefore does not necessarily imply Na+ depletion. Assess-
ing ﬂ uid status is the key to diagnosis (see ﬁ g 14.3).
Signs and symptoms Look for anorexia, nausea, and malaise initially, followed by 
headache, irritability, confusion, weakness, GCS, and seizures, depending on the se-
verity and rate of change in serum Na+. Cardiac failure or oedema may help to indi-
cate the cause. Hyponatraemia also increases the risk of falls in the elderly. 3
Causes See ﬁ g 14.3. Artefactual causes include: •blood sample was from a drip arm 
•high serum lipid/protein content causing serum volume, with Na+ concentration 
but normal plasma osmolality •if hyperglycaemic (20mmol/L) add ~4.3mmol/L to 
plasma Na+ for every 10mmol/L rise in glucose above normal.
Iatrogenic hyponatraemia If 5% glucose is infused continuously without adding 
0.9% saline, the glucose is quickly used, rendering the ﬂ uid hypotonic and causing hy-
ponatraemia, esp. in those on thiazide diuretics, women (esp. pre-menopausal), and 
those undergoing physiological stress (eg post-operative, septic). In some patients, 
only marginally low plasma Na+ levels cause serious eff ects (eg ~128mmol/L)—don’t 
attribute odd CNS signs to non-existent strokes/TIAS if Na+.
Management
  • Correct the underlying cause; never base treatment on Na+ concentration alone. 
The presence of symptoms, the chronicity of the hyponatraemia, and state of hy-
dration are all important. Replace Na+ and water at the same rate they were lost.
  • Asymptomatic  chronic  hyponatraemia,  ﬂ uid  restriction  is  often  suffi  cient  if 
asymptomatic, although demeclocycline (ADH antagonist) may be required. If hy-
pervolaemic (cirrhosis, CCF), treat the underlying disorder ﬁ rst.

  • Acute or symptomatic hyponatraemia, or if dehydrated, cautious rehydration 
with 0.9% saline may be given, but do not correct changes rapidly as central pontine 
myelinolysis2 may result. Maximum rise in serum Na+ 15mmol/L per day if chronic, 
or 1mmol/L per hour if acute. Consider using furosemide when not hypovolaemic 
to avoid ﬂ uid overload.

  • Vasopressor receptor antagonists (‘vaptans’, eg tolvaptan) promote water excre-
tion without loss of electrolytes, and appear to be eff ective in treating hypervolae-
mic and euvolaemic hyponatraemia but are expensive. 4

 In emergency: (Seizures, coma) seek expert help. Consider hypertonic saline (eg 
1.8% saline) at 70mmol Na+/h ± furosemide. Aim for a gradual increase in plasma 
Na+ to ≈125mmol/L. Beware heart failure and central pontine myelinolysis.2 

2  Central pontine myelinolysis: irreversible and often fatal pontine demyelination seen in malnourished 
alcoholics or rapid correction of Na+. There is subacute onset of lethargy, confusion, pseudobulbar palsy, 
para- or quadriparesis, ‘locked-in’ syndrome, or coma.

_OHCM_10e.indb   672

_OHCM_10e.indb   672

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Hyponatraemia

673

Is the patient dehydrated?

Yes

Is urinary Na+ 
>20mmol/L?

No

Is the patient 
oedematous?

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Yes

Na+ and H2O are 
lost via kidneys:
  • Addison’s dis.
  • Renal failure, 
eg diuretic 
phase of renal 
failure; 
nephro-
calc inosis or 
med ullary 
cystic disease

  • Diuretic 
excess
  • Osmolar 
di uresis 
(glu cose; 
urea)

No
Na+ and H2O 
are lost other 
than via the 
kidneys:
  • Diarrhoea
  • Vomiting
  • Fistulae
  • Burns
  • Rectal villous 

adeno ma
  • Small bowel 
obstruction

  • Trauma
  • Cystic ﬁ brosis
  • Heat expo-

sure

Fig 14.3  Hyponatraemia.

No
Is the urine 
osmolality 
>100mmol/kg?

Yes

  • Nephrotic syn-

drome

  • Cardiac failure
  • Liver cirrhosis 
(hyponatraemia
may precede
oedema)
  • Renal failure

Yes

No

  • SIADH

(see BOX)

  • Water 

overload

  • Severe hypo-
thy roidism

  • Gluco-

corticoid 
insuffi  ciency

Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH)
An  important,  but  over-diagnosed,  cause  of  hyponatraemia.  The  diagnosis  re-
quires concentrated urine (Na+ > 20mmol/L and osmolality > 100mosmol/kg) in the 
presence of hypo natraemia (plasma Na+ < 125mmol/L) and low plasma osmolality 
(< 260mosmol/kg), in the absence of hypovolaemia, oedema, or diuretics.
Causes:
  • Malignancy: lung small-cell, pancreas, prostate, thymus, or lymphoma.
  • CNS disorders: meningoencephalitis, abscess, stroke, subarachnoid or subdural 

haemorrhage, head injury, neurosurgery, Guillain–Barré, vasculitis, or SLE.
  • Chest disease: TB, pneumonia, abscess, aspergillosis, small-cell lung cancer.
  • Endocrine disease: hypothyroidism (not true SIADH, but perhaps due to excess 
ADH release from carotid sinus baroreceptors triggered by  cardiac output). 

  • Drugs: opiates, psychotropics, SSRIs, cytotoxics.
  • Other: acute intermittent porphyria, trauma, major abdominal or thoracic sur-

gery, symptomatic HIV.

Treatment: Treat the cause and restrict ﬂ uid. Consider salt ± loop diuretic if severe. 
Demeclocycline is used rarely. Vasopressin receptor antagonists (‘vaptans’, p672) 
are an emerging class of drug used in SIADH and other types of hyponatraemia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   673

_OHCM_10e.indb   673

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
674

Hyperkalaemia

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

A plasma potassium >6.5mmol/L is a potential emergency and needs urgent as-
sessment (see p301). The worry is of myocardial hyperexcitability leading to ven-
tricular ﬁ brillation and cardiac arrest. First assess the patient—do they look unwell, 
is there an obvious cause? If not, could it be an artefactual result?
Concerning signs and symptoms Include a fast irregular pulse, chest pain, weak-
ness, palpitations, and light-headedness. ECG: (see ﬁ g 14.4) tall tented T waves, small 
P waves, a wide QRS complex (eventually becoming sinusoidal), and ventricular ﬁ bril-
lation.
Artefactual results: If the patient is well, and has none of the above-mentioned 
ﬁ ndings, repeat the test urgently as it may be artefactual, caused by: •haemolysis 
(diffi  cult vene puncture; patient clenched ﬁ st) •contamination with potassium EDTA 
anticoagulant in FBC bottles (do FBCS after U&ES) •thrombocythaemia (K+ leaks out of 
platelets during clotting) •delayed analysis (K+ leaks out of RBCS; a particular problem 
in a primary care setting due to long transit times to the lab).5
Causes
  • Oliguric renal failure.
  • K+-sparing diuretics.
  • Rhabdomyolysis (p319).
  • Metabolic acidosis (DM).
  • Excess K+ therapy.
Treatment in non-urgent cases
Treat the underlying cause; review medications.
  • Polystyrene sulfonate resin (eg Calcium Resonium® 15g/8h PO) binds K+ in the gut, 
preventing absorption and bringing K+ levels down over a few days. If vomiting 
prevents PO administration, give a 30g enema, followed at 9h by colonic irrigation.

  • Addison’s disease (see p226).
  • Massive blood transfusion.
  • Burns.
  • Drugs, eg ACE-i, suxamethonium.
  • Artefactual result (see earlier ‘Artefactual results’).

Emergency treatment
If there is evidence of myocardial hyperexcitability, or K+ is >6.5mmol/L, get senior 
assistance, and treat as an emergency (see p301).

Hypokalaemia

If K+ <2.5mmol/L, urgent treatment is required. Note that hypokalaemia exacerbates 
digoxin toxicity.
Signs and symptoms Muscle weakness, hypotonia, hyporeﬂ exia, cramps, tetany, 
palpitations, light-headedness (arrhythmias), constipation.
ECG Small or inverted T waves, prominent U waves (after T wave), a long PR interval, 
and depressed ST segments.
Causes
  • Diuretics.
  • Vomiting and diarrhoea.
  • Pyloric stenosis.
  • Rectal villous adenoma.
  • Intestinal ﬁ stula.

  • Cushing’s syndrome/steroids/ACTH.
  • Conn’s syndrome.
  • Alkalosis.
  • Purgative and liquorice abuse.
  • Renal tubular failure (p316 & p664).

Ω is the best indication that hypokalaemia is likely to have been 
If on diuretics, HCO3
long-standing. Mg2+ may be low, and hypokalaemia is often diffi  cult to correct until 
Mg2+ levels are normalized. Suspect Conn’s syndrome if hypertensive, hypokalaemic 
alkalosis in someone not taking diuretics (p228).
In hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, intermittent weakness lasting up to 72h ap-
pears to be caused by K+ shifting from extra- to intracellular ﬂ uid. See OHCS p652.
Treatment  If  mild:  (>2.5mmol/L,  no  symptoms.)  Give  oral  K+  supplement 
(≥80mmol/24h,  eg  Sando-K®  2  tabs/8h).  Review  K+  after  3  days.  If  taking  a  thi-
azide diuretic, and K+ >3.0 consider repeating and/or K+-sparing diuretic. If severe: 
(<2.5mmol/L, and/or dangerous symptoms.) Give IV potassium cautiously, not more 
than 20mmol/h, and not more concentrated than 40mmol/L. Do not give K+ if oliguric. 
Never give K+ as a fast stat bolus dose.

_OHCM_10e.indb   674

_OHCM_10e.indb   674

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
_

_

O

O

H

H

C

C

M

M

_

_

1

1

0

0

e

e

.

.

i

i

n

n

d

d

b

b

6

6

7

7

5

5

0

0

2

2

/

/

0

0

5

5

/

/

2

2

0

0

1

1

7

7

1

1

9

9

:

:

0

0

8

8

Fig 14.4  Hyperkalaemia—note the ﬂ attening of the P waves, prominent T waves, and widening of the QRS complex.

Clinical chemistry

6
7
5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
676

Calcium and phosphate physiology

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

3Ω from bones •Ca2+ & PO4

Calcium and phosphate homeostasis is maintained through:
Parathyroid hormone (PTH): Overall eff ect is Ca2+ & PO4
3Ω. Secretion by four para-
thyroid glands is triggered by serum ionized Ca2+; controlled by Ωve feedback loop. 
Actions are: •osteoclast activity releasing Ca2+ and PO4
3Ω 
reabsorption in the kidney •renal production of 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3.
Vitamin D and calcitriol: Vit D is hydroxylated ﬁ rst in the liver to 25-hydroxy-vit D, 
and again in the kidney to 1,25-dihydroxy-vit D (calcitriol), the biologically active form, 
and 24,25-hydroxy-vit D (inactive). Calcitriol production is stimulated by Ca2+, PO4
3Ω, 
3Ω absorption from the gut •inhibition of PTH 
and PTH. Actions are: •Ca2+ and PO4
release •enhanced bone turnover •Ca2+ and PO4
3Ω reabsorption in the kidney. Chole-
calciferol (vit D3—from animal sources) and ergocalciferol (vit D2—from vegetables) 
are biologically identical in their activity. Disordered regulation of calcitriol underlies 
familial normocalc aemic hypercalciuria, which is a major cause of calcium oxalate 
renal stone formation (p638).
3Ω, but its physi-
Calcitonin: Made in C-cells of the thyroid, this causes Ca2+ and PO4
ological role is unclear. It can be used as a marker of recurrence or metastasis in 
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid.
Magnesium: Mg2+ prevents PTH release, and may cause hypocalcaemia.
Plasma binding: Labs usually measure total plasma Ca2+. ~40% is bound to albumin, 
and the rest is free ionized Ca2+ which is the physiologically important amount (often 
available on blood gas analyser). Therefore, correct total Ca2+ for albumin as follows: 
add 0.1mmol/L to Ca2+ level for every 4g/L that albumin is below 40g/L, and a similar 
subtraction for raised albumin. However, many other factors aff ect binding (eg other 
proteins in myeloma, cirrhosis, individual variation) so be cautious in your interpreta-
tion. If in doubt over a high Ca2+, take blood specimens uncuff ed (remove tourniquet 
after needle in vein, but before taking blood sample), and with the patient fasted.

Hypercalcaemia

Signs and symptoms ‘Bones, stones, groans, and psychic moans.’ Abdominal pain; 
vomiting; constipation; polyuria; polydipsia; depression; anorexia; weight loss; tired-
ness; weakness; hypertension, confusion; pyrexia; renal stones; renal failure; ectopic 
calciﬁ cation (eg cornea—see BOX); cardiac arrest. ECG: QT interval.
Causes (See ﬁ g 14.5.) Most commonly malignancy (eg from bone metastases, mye-
loma, PTHrP) or primary hyperparathyroidism. Others include sarcoidosis, vit D intoxi-
cation, thyrotoxicosis, lithium, tertiary hyperparathyroidism, milk-alkali syndrome, 
and familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (rare; defect in calcium-sensing 
receptor). HIV can cause both  & Ca2+ (perhaps from PTH-related bone remodelling).6
Investigations  The  main  distinction  is  malignancy  vs  1°  hyperparathyroidism. 
3Ω, ALP. PTH indicates 
Pointers to malignancy are albumin, ClΩ, alkal osis, K+, PO4
hyperparathyroidism. Also FBC, protein electrophoresis, CXR, isotope bone scan, 24h 
urinary Ca2+ excretion (for familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia). 

Causes of metastatic (ectopic) calciﬁ cation ‘PARATTHORMONE’ 
Parathormone (PTH) (p222) and other causes of Ca2+, eg sarcoidosis; Amyloidosis; 
3Ω);  Addison’s  disease  (adrenal  calciﬁ cation); 
Renal  failure  (relates  to  PO4
TB nodes; Toxoplasmosis (CNS); Histoplasmosis (eg in lung); Overdose of vitamin D; 
Raynaud’s-associated diseases (eg SLE; systemic sclerosis p552; dermatomyositis); 
Muscle primaries/leiomyosarcomas); Ossifying metastases (Osteosarcoma) or Ovar-
ian mets (to peritoneum); Nephrocalcinosis; Endocrine tumours (eg gastrinoma).

_OHCM_10e.indb   676

_OHCM_10e.indb   676

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Hypercalcaemia1

677

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Albumin raised

Albumin normal or low

Urea raised:
  • Dehydration 

Urea normal:
  • Cuff ed 

specimen

Phosphate 
 or 

Phosphate 
 or  

Urea normal:
1° or 3° hyperpara-
thyroidism

ALP (eg from bone 
turnover):
  • Bone 

metastases2
  • Sarcoidosis
  • Thyrotoxicosis
  • Lithium 

ALP normal:
  • Myeloma (plasma

protein)

  • Vitamin D excess
  • Sarcoidosis
  • With HCO3

Ω, 
milk-alkali syn-
drome3 

Fig 14.5  Hypercalcaemia.
1  This diagram is only a guide: use in conjunction with the clinical picture.
2  Most common primary: breast, kidney, lung, thyroid, prostate, ovary, colon.
3  Ingesting too much calcium and alkali (eg in milk) can cause hypercalcaemia with metastatic calciﬁ ca-
tion and renal failure. Thyrotoxicosis causes alkalaemia because of hyperventilation.7

Treating acute hypercalcaemia
Diagnose and treat the underlying cause. If Ca2+ >3.5mmol/L and symptomatic:
1      Correct dehydration: If dehydrated give IV 0.9% saline.
2      Bisphosphonates: These prevent bone resorption by inhibiting osteoclast ac-
tivity. A single dose of pamidronate lowers Ca2+ over 2–3d; maximum eff ect is 
at 1wk. Infuse slowly, eg 30mg in 300mL 0.9% saline over 3h via a largish vein. 
Max dose 90mg (see table 14.4). Zoledronic acid is signiﬁ cantly more eff ective 
in reducing serum Ca2+ than previously used bisphosphonates.8 Usually, a single 
dose of 4mg IV (diluted to 100mL, over 15min) will normalize plasma Ca2+ within 
3Ω, bone pain, myalgia, nausea, vomiting, head-
a week. SE, ﬂ u symptoms, PO4
ache, lymphocytopenia, Mg2+, Ca2+, seizures.

3      Further  management:  Chemotherapy  may  help  in  malignancy.  Steroids  are 
used in sarcoidosis, eg prednisolone 40–60mg/d. Salmon calcitonin acts similar-
ly to bisphosphonates, and has a quicker onset of action, but is now rarely used. 
NB: the use of furosemide is contentious, as supporting RCT evidence is scant.9,10 
It helps to promote renal excretion of Ca2+, but can exacerbate hypercalcaemia 
by worsening dehydration. Thus it should only be used once fully rehydrated, 
and with concomitant IV ﬂ uids (eg 0.9% saline 1L/4–6h). Avoid thiazides.

Table 14.4  Disodium pamidronate doses
Calcium (mmol/L; corrected)  Single-dose pamidronate (mg)
<3
3–3.5
3.5–4
>4

15–30
30–60
60–90
90

_OHCM_10e.indb   677

_OHCM_10e.indb   677

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
678

Hypocalcaemia

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Apparent hypocalcaemia may be an artefact of hypoalbuminaemia (p676).
Signs  and  symptoms  See  BOX.11  Mild:  cramps,  perioral  numbness/paraesthesiae. 
Severe:  carpopedal  spasm  (especially  if  brachial  artery  compressed,  Trousseau’s 
sign; see ﬁ g 14.6), laryngo spasm, seizures. Neuromuscular excitability may also be 
demonstrated by tapping over parotid (facial nerve) causing facial muscles to twitch 
(Chvostek’s sign; see ﬁ g 14.7). Cataract if chronic hypocalcaemia. ECG: Long QT interval.
Causes With PO4

3Ω

3Ω

  • Chronic kidney disease (p302).
  • Hypoparathyroidism (incl thyroid 

or parathyroid surgery, p222).

  • Pseudohypoparathyroidism (p222).
  • Acute rhabdomyolysis.
  • Hypomagnesaemia.

With  or PO4
  • Vitamin D deﬁ ciency.
  • Osteomalacia (ALP).
  • Acute pancreatitis.
  • Over-hydration.
  • Respiratory alkalosis (total Ca2+ 
is normal, but ionized Ca2+ due 
to pH  symptomatic).

Treatment
  • Mild symptoms: Give calcium 5mmol/6h PO, with daily plasma Ca2+ levels.
  • In chronic kidney disease: See p302. May require alfacalcidol, eg 0.5–1mcg/24h PO.
  • Severe symptoms: Give 10mL of 10% calcium gluconate (2.25mmol) IV over 30min, 

and repeat as necessary. If due to respiratory alkalosis, correct the alkalosis.

Features of hypocalcaemia ‘SPASMODIC’
Spasms (carpopedal spasms = Trous seau’s sign)
Perioral paraesthesiae
Anxious, irritable, irrational
Seizures
Muscle tone  in smooth muscle—hence colic, wheeze, and dysphagia
Orientation impaired (time, place, and person) and confusion
Dermatitis (eg atopic/exfoliative) 
Im petigo herpetiformis (Ca2+ and pus   tules in pregnancy—rare and serious)
Chvostek’s sign; choreoathetosis; cataract; cardio myopathy (long QT interval on ECG).

Fig 14.6  Trousseau’s sign: on inﬂ ating the cuff , 
the  wrist  and  ﬁ ngers  ﬂ ex  and  draw  together 
(carpopedal spasm).

Fig  14.7  Chvostek’s  sign:  the  corner  of  the 
mouth twitches when the facial nerve is tapped 
over the parotid.

_OHCM_10e.indb   678

_OHCM_10e.indb   678

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Phosphate

679

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Hypophosphataemia Common and of little signiﬁ cance unless severe (<0.4mmol/L). 
Causes: Vitamin  D deﬁ ciency, alcohol withdrawal, refeeding syndrome (p587), in-
adequate  oral  intake,  severe  diabetic  ketoacidosis,  renal  tubular  dysfunction  and 
1° hyperparathyroidism. Signs and symptoms: Muscle weakness or rhabdomyoly-
sis, red cell, white cell and platelet dysfunction, and cardiac arrest or arrhythmias. 
Treatment: Oral or parenteral phosphate supplementation, eg Phosphate Polyfu-
3Ω in 500mL). Never give  IV phosphate to a patient who is 
sor®  IVI (100mmol PO4
hypercalcaemic or oliguric.
Hyperphosphataemia Most commonly due to chronic kidney disease, when it is 
treated with phosphate binders, eg sevelamer 800mg/8h PO during meals. Also cata-
bolic states such as tumour lysis syndrome (p529).

Magnesium

Magnesium is distributed 65% in bone and 35% in cells; plasma concentration tends 
to follow that of Ca2+ and K+.
Hypomagnesaemia  Causes  paraesthesiae,  ataxia,  seizures,  tetany,  arrhythmias. 
Digitalis  toxicity  may  be  exacerbated.  Causes:  Diuretics,  severe  diarrhoea,  ke-
toacidosis, alcohol abuse, total parenteral nutrition (monitor weekly), Ca2+, K+, and 
3Ω. Treatment: If needed, give magnesium salts, PO or IV (eg 8mmol MgSO4 IV 
PO4
over 3min to 2h, depending on severity, with frequent Mg2+ levels).
Hypermagnesaemia  Rarely  requires  treatment  unless  severe  (>7.5mmol/L). 
Causes: Renal failure or iatrogenic (eg excessive antacids). Signs: If severe: neuro-
muscular depression, BP, pulse, hypo reﬂ exia, CNS & respiratory depression, coma.

Zinc

Zinc deﬁ ciency This may occur in parenteral nutrition or, rarely, from a poor diet 
(too few cereals and dairy products; anorexia nervosa; alcoholism). Rarely it is due 
to a genetic defect. Symptoms: Alopecia, dermatitis (look for red, crusted skin le-
sions especially around nostrils and corners of mouth), night blindness, diarrhoea. 
Diagnosis: Therapeutic trial of zinc (plasma levels are unreliable as they may be low, 
eg in infection or trauma, without deﬁ ciency).

Selenium

An  essential  element  present  in  cereals,  nuts,  and  meat.  Low  soil  levels  in  some 
parts  of  Europe  and  China  cause  deﬁ ciency  states.  Required  for  the  antioxidant 
glutathione peroxidase, which  harmful free radicals. Selenium is also antithrom-
bogenic, and is required for sperm motility proteins. Deﬁ ciency may increase risk 
of neoplasia and atheroma, and may lead to a cardiomyopathy or arthritis. Serum 
levels are a poor guide. Toxic symptoms may also be found with over-energetic re-
placement.

_OHCM_10e.indb   679

_OHCM_10e.indb   679

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
680

Urate and the kidney

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Causes of hyperuricaemia High levels of urate in the blood (hyperuricaemia) may 
result from increased turnover (15%) or reduced excretion of urate (85%). Either 
may be drug induced.
  • Drugs: Cytotoxics, thiazides, loop diuretics, pyrazinamide.
  • Increased  cell  turnover:  Lymphoma,  leukaemia,  psoriasis,  haemolysis,  muscle 

death (rhabdomyolysis, p319; tumour lysis syndrome, p529).

  • Reduced excretion: Primary gout (p548), chronic kidney disease, lead nephropathy, 

hyperparathyroidism, pre-eclampsia (OHCS p48).

  • Other: Hyperuricaemia may be associated with hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. 
Urate  may  be  raised  in  disorders  of  purine  synthesis  such  as  the  Lesch–Nyhan 
syndrome (OHCS p648).

Hyperuricaemia and renal failure Severe renal failure from any cause may be 
associated with hyperuricaemia, and rarely this may give rise to gout. Sometimes 
the relationship of cause and eff ect is reversed so that it is the hyperuricaemia that 
causes the renal failure. This can occur following cytotoxic treatment (tumour lysis 
syndrome, p529), and in muscle necrosis.
How urate causes renal failure: Urate is poorly soluble in water, so over-excretion 
can lead to crystal precipitation. Renal failure occurs most commonly because urate 
precipitates in the renal tubules. This may occur at plasma levels ≥1 . 19mmol/L. In 
some instances, ureteric obstruction from urate crystals may occur. This responds 
to retrograde ureteric catheterization and lavage.
Prevention of renal failure: Before starting chemotherapy, ensure good hydration 
and  initiate  allopurinol  (xanthine  oxidase  inhibitor)  or  rasburicase  (recombinant 
urate  oxidase),  which  prevent  a  sharp  rise  in  urate  following  chemotherapy  (see 
p528). There is a remote risk of inducing xanthine nephropathy.
Treatment of hyperuricaemic acute kidney injury: Exclude bilateral ureteric ob-
struction, then give prompt rehydration ± loop diuretic to wash uric acid crystals 
out of the renal tubules, and correct electrolyte abnormalities. Once oliguria is es-
tablished, haemodialysis is required (in preference to peritoneal dialysis). There is no 
evidence for either preventing (see previous paragraph) or treating hyperuricaemic 
renal failure.
Gout See p548.
Urate renal stones Urate stones (ﬁ g 14.8) comprise 
5–10% of all renal stones and are radiolucent.
Incidence:  ~5–10%  in  temperate  climates  (double 
if conﬁ rmed gout), 12 but up to 40% in hot, arid cli-
mates. :≈4:1. But most urate stone formers have 
no detectable abnormalities in urate metabolism.
Risk factors: Acidic or strongly concentrated urine; 
urinary excretion of urate; chronic diarrhoea; distal 
small bowel disease or resection (regional enteritis); 
ileostomy; obesity; diabetes mellitus; chemotherapy 
for myeloproliferative disorders; inadequate caloric 
or ﬂ uid intake.
Treatment: Hydration to increase urine volume (aim 
>2L/d).  Unlike  most  other  renal  calculi,  existing  uric 
acid stones can often be dissolved with either systemic 
or topical alkalinizing agents. Potassium citrate or 
potassium bicarbonate at a dose titrated to alkalinize the urine to a pH of 6–7 dis-
solves some urate stones. If hyperuricosuria, consider dietary management  ± al-
lopurinol (xanthine oxidase inhibitor). 

Fig 14.8  Urate stone.

©Dr G. Austin.

_OHCM_10e.indb   680

_OHCM_10e.indb   680

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
681

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

_OHCM_10e.indb   681

_OHCM_10e.indb   681

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
682

Metabolic bone diseases: osteoporosis

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Osteoporosis implies reduced bone mass. It may be 1° (age-related) or 2° to another 
condition or drugs. If trabecular bone is aff ected, crush fractures of vertebrae are 
common (hence the ‘littleness’ of little old ladies and their dowager’s hump); if cortical 
bone is aff ected, long bone fractures are more likely, eg femoral neck: the big cause of 
death and orthopaedic expense (80% hip fractures in the UK occur in women >50yrs).
Prevalence (In those >50yrs):  6%,  18%. Women lose trabeculae with age, but 
in men, although there is reduced bone formation, numbers of trabeculae are stable 
and their lifetime risk of fracture is less. 
Risk  factors  Age-independent  risk  factors  for  1°  osteoporosis:  parental  history, 
alcohol >4 units daily, rheumatoid arthritis, BMI <19, prolonged immobility, and un-
treated menopause. See BOX ‘Osteoporosis risk factors’ for other risk factors, includ-
ing for 2° osteoporosis.
Investigations  X-ray  (low  sensitivity/speciﬁ city,  often  with  hindsight  after  a 
fracture). Bone densitometry (DEXA—see BOX ‘DEXA bone densitometry’; table 14.5). 
3Ω, and ALP normal. Consider speciﬁ c investigations for 2° causes 
Bloods: Ca2+, PO4
if suggestive history. Biopsy is unreliable and unnecessary with non-invasive tech-
niques available.
Management Loss of bone mineral density may not be entirely irreversible. Age, 
number of risk factors, and bone mineral density (DEXA scan; see BOX ‘DEXA bone den-
sitometry’) guide the pharmacological approach (eg FRAX, which is a WHO risk assess-
ment tool for estimating 10-yr risk of osteoporotic fracture in untreated patients; see 
www.shef.ac.uk/frax),13,14 although DEXA is not necessary if age >75yrs. Lifestyle measures 
should apply to all (including those at risk but not yet osteoporotic).
Lifestyle measures:
  • Quit smoking and reduce alcohol consumption.
  • Weight-bearing exercise may increase bone mineral density.15
  • Balance exercises such as tai chi reduce risk of falls.
  • Calcium and vitamin D-rich diet (use supplements if diet is insuffi  cient—see ‘Phar-

macological measures’ later in this topic).

  • Home-based fall-prevention programme, with visual assessment and a home visit. 

NB: hip-protectors are unreliable for preventing fractures.16

Pharmacological measures:
  • Bisphosphonates: alendronic acid is 1st line (10mg/d or 70mg/wk; not if eGFR <35). 
Use also for prevention in long-term steroid use. If intolerant, try etidronate or rise-
dronate. Tell patient to swallow pills with plenty of water while remaining upright for 
>30min and wait 30min before eating or other drugs. (SE: photosensitivity; GI upset; 
oesophageal ulcers—stop if dysphagia or abdo pain; rarely, jaw osteonecrosis).

  • Calcium and vitamin D: rarely used alone for prophylaxis, as questionable effi  cacy 
and some evidence of a small CV risk. Off er if evidence of deﬁ ciency, eg calcium 
1g/d + vit D 800U/d. Target serum 25-hydroxy-vitamin D level ≥75nmol/L.

  • Strontium ranelate: due to an increased risk of cardiac problems it should only be used 
in those with severe intolerance of other agents and without cardiovascular disease.
  • Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can prevent (not treat) osteoporosis in post-
menopausal women. Relative risk of breast cancer is 1 . 4 if used >10yrs;  CV risk.
  • Raloxifene is a selective oestrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that acts similarly to 

HRT, but with  breast cancer risk.

  • Teriparatide (recombinant PTH) is useful in those who suff er further fractures de-
spite treatment with other agents. There is a potential  risk of renal malignancy.

  • Calcitonin may reduce pain after a vertebral fracture.
  • Testosterone may help in hypo gonadal men by promoting trabecular connectivity.
  • Denosumab, a monoclonal Ab to RANK ligand, given SC twice yearly  reabsorption. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   682

_OHCM_10e.indb   682

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
DEXA bone densitometry: WHO osteoporosis criteria 
It is better to scan the hip than the lumbar spine. Bone mineral density (g/cm2) 
is compared with that of a young healthy adult. The ‘T-score’ is the number of 
standard deviations (SD, p751) the bone mineral density (BMD) is from the youthful 
average. Each decrease of 1 SD in BMD ≈ 2.6-fold  in risk of hip fracture.
Table 14.5  Interpreting DEXA bone scan results

683

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

T-score >0
0 to Ω1
Ω1 to Ω2.5
Ω2.5 or worse Osteoporosis. Off er lifestyle advice and treatment (p682). Repeat 

BMD is better than the reference.
BMD is in the top 84%: no evidence of osteoporosis.
Osteopenia. Risk of later osteoporotic fracture. Off er lifestyle advice. 

DEXA in 2yrs.

Some indications for DEXA:
  • NICE suggests DEXA if previous low-trauma fracture, or for women ≥ 65yrs with one 
or more risk factors for osteoporosis, or younger if two or more. The beneﬁ ts of 
universal screening for osteoporosis remain unproven, but some authorities rec-
ommend this for men and women over 70—and earlier if risk factors are present.17
  • DEXA is not needed pre-treatment for women over 75yrs if previous low-trauma 
fracture, or ≥ 2 present of rheumatoid arthritis, alcohol excess, or positive family 
history.

  • Prior to giving long-term prednis olone (eg 3 months at >5mg/d). Steroids cause 
osteoporosis by promoting osteoclast bone resorption, muscle mass, and Ca2+ 
absorption from the gut.

  • Men or women with osteopenia if low-trauma, non-vertebral fracture. 
  • Bone  and  bone-remodelling  disorders  (eg  parathyroid  disorders,  myeloma, 

HIV, esp. if on protease inhibitors). 

Osteoporosis risk factors: ‘SHATTERED’
Steroid use of >5mg/d of prednisolone.
Hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria.
Alcohol and tobacco use .
Thin (BMI <18.5).
Testosterone  (eg anti androgen ca prostate ).
Early menopause.
Renal or liver failure.
Erosive/inﬂ ammatory bone disease (eg myeloma or rheumatoid arthritis).
Dietary Ca2+/malab sorption; diabetes mellitus type 1.

_OHCM_10e.indb   683

_OHCM_10e.indb   683

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
684

Metabolic bone diseases: osteomalacia

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

3Ω and vitamin D deﬁ ciency per se.

In osteomalacia, there is a normal amount of bone but its mineral content is low 
(there is excess uncalciﬁ ed osteoid and cartilage). This is the reverse of osteoporosis 
in which mineralization is unchanged, but there is overall bone loss. Rickets is the 
result if this process occurs during the period of bone growth; osteomalacia is the 
result if it occurs after fusion of the epiphyses.
Signs and symptoms
Rickets:  Growth  retardation,  hypotonia,  apathy  in  infants.  Once  walking:  knock-
kneed, bow-legged, and deformities of the metaphyseal–epiphyseal junction (eg the 
rachitic rosary). Features of Ca2+—often mild (p678). Children with rickets are ill.
Osteomalacia: Bone pain and tenderness; fractures (esp. femoral neck); proximal 
myopathy (waddling gait), due to PO4
Causes
Vitamin D deﬁ ciency: Due to malabsorption (p266), poor diet, or lack of sunlight.
Renal osteodystrophy: Renal failure leads to 1,25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol deﬁ cien-
cy [1,25(OH)2-vitamin D deﬁ ciency]. See also renal bone disease (p312).
Drug-induced: Anticonvulsants may induce liver enzymes, leading to an increased 
breakdown of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D.
Vitamin  D  resistance: A number of mainly inherited conditions in which the os-
teomalacia responds to high doses of vitamin D (see ‘Treatment’ later in this topic).
Liver disease: Due to reduced hydroxylation of vitamin D to 25-hydroxy-cholecalcif-
erol and malabsorption of vitamin D, eg in cirrhosis (p276).
Tumour-induced  osteomalacia:  (Oncogenic  hypophosphataemia.)  Mediated  by 
raised tumour production of phosphat onin ﬁ broblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) which 
causes hyperphosphaturia. serum PO4
Investigations
Plasma: Mildly Ca2+ (but may be severe); PO4
except in vitamin D resistance. In renal failure, 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D (p312).
Biopsy: Bone biopsy shows incomplete mineralization. Muscle biopsy (if proximal 
myopathy) is normal.
X-ray: In osteomalacia, there is a loss of cortical bone; also, apparent partial frac-
tures  without  displacement  may  be  seen  especially  on  the  lateral  border  of  the 
scapula, inferior femoral neck, and medial femoral shaft (Looser’s zones; see ﬁ g 14.9). 
Cupped, ragged metaphyseal surfaces are seen in rickets (ﬁ g 14.10).
Treatment
  • In dietary insuffi  ciency, give vitamin D, eg as one calcium D3 forte tablet/12h PO.
  • In malabsorption or hepatic disease, give vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol), up to 40 000U 

3Ω often causes myalgia and weakness.18

3Ω; ALP; PTH high; 25(OH)-vitamin D, 

(=1mg) daily, or parenteral calcitriol, eg 7.5mg monthly.

  • If  due  to  renal  disease  or  vitamin  D  resistance,  give  alfacalcidol  (1-hydroxy-
vitamin D3) 250ng–1mcg daily, or calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3) 250ng–1mcg 
daily, and adjust dose according to plasma Ca2+. Alfacalcidol and calcitriol can 
cause dangerous hypercalcaemia.

  • Monitor plasma Ca2+, initially weekly, and if nausea/vomiting.
Vitamin D-resistant rickets Exists in two forms. Type I has low renal 1-hydroxy-
lase activity, and type II has end-organ resistance to 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3, due 
to a point mutation in the receptor. Both are treated with large doses of calcitriol.
X-linked  hypophosphataemic  rickets  Dominantly  inherited—due  to  a  defect  in 
renal phosphate handling (due to mutations in the PEX or PHEX genes which encode 
an endopeptidase). Rickets develops in early childhood and is associated with poor 
3Ω is low, ALP is high, and there is phosphaturia. Treat ment is with 
growth. Plasma PO4
high doses of oral phosphate, and calcitriol. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   684

_OHCM_10e.indb   684

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Metabolic bone diseases: Paget’s disease of bone

685

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Also called osteitis deformans, there is increased bone turnover associated with 
increased numbers of osteoblasts and osteoclasts with resultant remodelling, bone 
enlargement, deformity, and weakness. Rare in the under-40s. Incidence rises with 
age (3% over 55yrs old). Commoner in temperate climates, and in Anglo-Saxons.
Clinical features Asymptomatic in ~70%. Deep, boring pain, and bony deformity 
and enlargement—typically of the pelvis, lumbar spine, skull, femur, and tibia (clas-
sically a bowed sabre tibia; ﬁ g 14.11). Complications include pathological fractures, 
osteo arthritis, Ca2+, nerve compression due to bone overgrowth (eg deafness, root 
compression), high-output CCF (if >40% of skeleton involved), and osteosarcoma (<1% 
of those aff ected for >10yrs—suspect if sudden onset or worsening of bone pain).19
Radiology  X-ray Localized enlargement of bone. Patchy cortical thickening with 
sclerosis, osteolysis, and deformity (eg osteoporosis circumscripta of the skull). Af-
ﬁ nity for axial skeleton, long bones, and skull. Bone scan may reveal ‘hot spots’.
Blood chemistry Ca2+ and PO4
Treatment If analgesia fails, alendronic acid may be tried to reduce pain and/or 
deformity. It is more eff ective than etidronate or calcitonin, and as eff ective as IV 
pamidronate. Follow expert advice.

3Ω normal; ALP markedly raised.

Fig  14.10  Rickets.  Typical  ragged  meta-
physeal surfaces are seen in the knee and 
ankle joints of a child with rickets, with 
bowing of the long bones.

Image courtesy of Dr Ian Maddison.

Fig 14.9  Osteomalacia. Cortical bone lucen-
cy and Looser’s zones are seen in both fore-
arms of a patient with osteomalacia.

Image courtesy of Dr Ian Maddison.

Fig 14.11  Paget’s disease. The ‘sabre tibia’ seen in 
Paget’s disease, with multiple sclerotic lesions.

Image courtesy of Dr Ian Maddison.

_OHCM_10e.indb   685

_OHCM_10e.indb   685

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
686

Plasma proteins

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

The plasma contains a number of proteins including albumin, immunoglobulins, 1-
antitrypsin, 2-macroglobulin,  caeruloplasmin,  transferrin,  low-density  lipoprotein 
(LDL), ﬁ brinogen, complement, and factor VIII. The most abundant is albumin (see 
ﬁ g 14.12).
Albumin Synthesized in the liver; t½ ≈ 20d. It binds bilirubin, free fatty acids, Ca2+, 
and some drugs. Low albumin: Results in oedema, and is caused by: •synthesis: 
liver disease, acute phase response (due to vascular permeability—eg sepsis, trau-
ma, surgery), malabsorption, malnutrition, malignancy •loss: nephrotic syndrome, 
protein-losing enteropathy, burns •haemodilution: late pregnancy, artefact (eg from 
‘drip’ arm). Also posture (5g/L if upright) and genetic variations. High  albumin: 
Causes are dehydration; artefact (eg stasis).
Immunoglobulins  (Antibodies)  are  synthesized  by  B  cells.  Five  isoforms  Ig 
A,D,E,G,M exist in humans, and IgG is the most abundant circulating form. Speciﬁ c 
monoclonal band in paraproteinaemia (see p370). Diffusely raised in chronic infec-
tions, TB, bronchiectasis, liver cirrhosis, sarcoidosis, SLE, RA, Crohn’s disease, 1° biliary 
cirrhosis, hepatitis, and parasitaemia. Low in nephrotic syndrome, malabsorption, 
malnutrition, and immune deﬁ ciency states (eg severe illness, renal failure, diabetes 
mellitus, malignancy, or congenital).
Acute phase response The body responds to a variety of insults with, among other 
things, the synthesis, by the liver, of a number of proteins (normally present in serum 
in  small  quantities)—eg  1-antitrypsin,  ﬁ brinogen,  complement,  haptoglobin,  and 
CRP. A concomitant reduction in albumin level, is characteristic of conditions such 
as infection, malignancy (especially 2-fraction), trauma, surgery, and inﬂ ammatory 
disease.
CRP So called because it binds to a polysaccharide (fraction C) in the cell wall of pneu-
mococci. Levels help monitor inﬂ ammation/infection (normal <8mg/L). Like the ESR, 
it is raised in many inﬂ ammatory conditions, but changes more rapidly. It increases 
in hours and begins to fall within 2–3d of recovery; thus it can be used to follow 
disease activity (eg Crohn’s disease) or the response to therapy (eg antibiotics). CRP 
values in mild inﬂ ammation 10–50mg/L; active bacterial infection 50–200mg/L; se-
vere infection or trauma >200mg/L; see table 14.6.

Urinary proteins

Urinary protein loss >150mg/d is pathological (p294).
Albuminuria Usually caused by renal disease (p294). Microalbuminuria: Urinary 
protein loss between 30 and 300mg/d (so not visible on normal dipstick) and may 
be seen with diabetes mellitus, BP, SLE, and glomerulonephritis (see p314 for role 
in DM). Can also be quantiﬁ ed by measuring the urinary albumin:creatinine ratio 
(A:CR), usually a ﬁ rst-in-the-morning spot urine sample. A level >30mg/mmol indi-
cates albuminuria, and microalbuminuria is deﬁ ned as >2.5mg/mmol in men and >3.5 
in women. This is a useful screening test in diabetics, and subjects with reduced 
eGFR. Note some labs measure total urinary protein not albumin—a P:CR of 50, is 
equivalent to an A:CR of 30.20
Bence Jones protein Consists of light chains excreted in excess by some patients 
with  myeloma  (p368).  They  are  not  detected  by  dipsticks  and  may  occur  with 
normal serum electrophoresis.
Haemoglobinuria Caused by intravascular haemolysis (p336).
Myoglobinuria Caused by rhabdomyolysis (p319).

_OHCM_10e.indb   686

_OHCM_10e.indb   686

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Table 14.6  C-reactive protein (CRP)
Marked elevation
Bacterial infection
Abscess
Crohn’s disease
Connective tissue diseases (except SLE)
Neoplasia
Trauma
Necrosis (eg MI)

Normal-to-slight elevation
Viral infection
Steroids/oestrogens
Ulcerative colitis

SLE
Morbid obesity
Atherosclerosis

Fig 14.12  A normal electrophoretic scan.

687

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

_OHCM_10e.indb   687

_OHCM_10e.indb   687

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
688

Plasma enzymes

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Reference intervals vary between laboratories. See p752 for a guide to normal values.
Raised levels of speciﬁ c enzymes can be a useful indicator of a disease. However, 
remember that most can be raised for other reasons too. Levels may be raised due 
to cellular damage, cell turnover, cellular proliferation (malignancy), enzyme induc-
tion, and clearance. The major causes of raised enzymes:
Alkaline phosphatase (Several distinguishable isoforms exist, eg liver and bone.)
  • Liver disease (suggests cholestasis; also cirrhosis, abscess, hepatitis, or malignancy).
  • Bone  disease  (isoenzyme  distinguishable,  reﬂ ects  osteoblast  activity)  especially 
Paget’s, growing children, healing fractures, bone metastases, osteomalacia, os-
teomyelitis, chronic kidney disease, and hyperparathyroidism.

  • Congestive cardiac failure (moderately raised).
  • Pregnancy (placenta makes its own isoenzyme).
Alanine and aspartate aminotransferase (ALT and AST)
  • Liver disease (suggests hepatocyte damage).
  • AST also  in MI, skeletal muscle damage (especially crush injuries), and haemolysis.
-Amylase
  • Acute pancreatitis (smaller rise in chronic pancreatitis as less tissue remaining).
  • Also: severe uraemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, severe gastroenteritis, and peptic ulcer.
Creatine kinase (CK) A raised CK does not necessarily mean an MI.
  • Myocardial infarction (p118; isoenzyme ‘CK-MB’. Diagnostic if CK-MB >6% of total CK, 
or CK-MB mass >99 percentile of normal). CK returns to baseline within 48h (unlike 
troponin, which remains raised for ~10 days),  useful for detecting re-infarction.
  • Muscle damage (rhabdomyolysis, p319; prolonged running; haematoma; seizures; 
IM injection; deﬁ brillation; bowel ischaemia; myxoedema; dermatomyositis, p552)—
and drugs (eg statins).

Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT, GT)
  • Liver disease (particularly alcohol-induced damage, cholestasis, drugs).
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
  • Myocardial infarction (p118).
  • Liver disease (suggests hepatocyte damage).
  • Haemolysis (esp. sickle cell crisis), pulmonary embolism, and tumour necrosis.
Troponin
  • Subtypes troponin T and troponin I are used clinically.
  • Cardiac damage or strain (MI—p118, pericarditis, myocarditis, PE, sepsis, CPR).
  • Chronic kidney disease (troponin T only; elevation less marked; aetiology unknown).

_OHCM_10e.indb   688

_OHCM_10e.indb   688

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Enzyme inducers and inhibitors
Hepatic  drug  metabolism  is  mainly  by  conjugation  or  oxidation.  The  oxidative 
pathways are catalysed by the family of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, the most 
important of which is the CYP 3A4 isoenzyme. The cytochrome P450 pathway may 
be either induced or inhibited by a range of commonly used drugs and foods (table 
14.7).

This can lead to important interactions or side-eff ects. For example, phenytoin 
reduces the eff ectiveness of the contraceptive pill due to more rapid oestrogen 
metabolism, and ciproﬂ oxacin retards the metabolism of methylxanthines (ami-
nophylline) which leads to higher plasma levels and potentially more side-eff ects. 
The BNF contains a list of the major interactions between drugs.

Table 14.7  Common inhibitors and inducers of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes

Enzyme inducers
Phenytoin
Rifampicin
Carbamazepine
Alcohol
St John’s wort
Barbiturates

Enzyme inhibitors

SSRIS
Ciproﬂ oxacin
Isoniazid
Macrolides
HIV protease inhibitors
Imidazole and triazole antifungal agents

Amiodarone
Diltiazem
Verapamil
Omeprazole
Grapefruit juice

689

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

_OHCM_10e.indb   689

_OHCM_10e.indb   689

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
690

Hyperlipidaemia

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Lipids travel in blood packaged with proteins as lipoproteins. There are four classes: 
chylomicrons and VLDL (mainly triglyceride), LDL (mainly cholesterol), and HDL (mainly 
phospho lipid)  (for  abbreviations  see  footnote3).  The  evidence  that  cholesterol  is  a 
major risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) is undisputed (‘4S’ STUDY, 21 WOSCOPS, 22 
CARE STUDY, 23 HEART PROTECTION STUDY 24) and indeed it may even be the ‘green light’ that 
allows other risk factors to act. 25 Half the UK population have a serum cholesterol 
putting them at signiﬁ cant risk of CVD. HDL appears to correlate inversely with CVD.
Who to screen for hyperlipidaemia
NB: full screening requires a fasting lipid proﬁ le.
Those at risk of hyperlipidaemia: •Family history of hyperlipidaemia. •Corneal ar-
cus <50yrs old. •Xanthomata or xanthelasmata (ﬁ g 14.13).
Those at risk of CVD:  •Known CVD. •Family history of CVD <60yrs old. •DM or impaired 
glucose tolerance. •Hypertension. •Smoker. •BMI. •Low socioeconomic or Indian 
Asian background.
Types of hyperlipidaemia
Common primary hyperlipidaemia: Accounts for 70% of hyperlipidaemia. LDL only.
Familial primary hyperlipidaemias: Multiple phenotypes exist (see table 14.8). Risk 
of  CVD, although evidence suggests protection from  CVD is achieved with lower 
doses of statin than for common primary hyperlipidaemia. 26 Refer to specialist.
Secondary hyperlipidaemia: Causes include: Cushing’s syndrome, hypothyroidism, 
nephrotic syndrome, or cholestasis. LDL. Treat the cause ﬁ rst.
Mixed hyperlipidaemia: Results in  in both LDL and triglycerides. Caused by type 
2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, alcohol abuse, and chronic renal failure.
Management 
Identify familial or 2° hyperlipidaemias, as  may diff er. Give lifestyle advice; aim for 
BMI of 20–25; encourage a Mediterranean-style diet—fruit, vegetables, ﬁ sh, unsatu-
rated fats; and red meat; exercise. Top  priority are those with known CVD (there 
is no need to calculate their risk: ipso facto they already have high risk). Second 
 priority is primary prevention in patients with chronic kidney disease or type-1 
diabetes, and those with a 10-yr risk of CVD >10%, irrespective of baseline lipid levels.
  • 1st-line therapy: Atorvastatin 20mg PO at night, for primary prevention, and 80mg 
for secondary prevention and primary prevention in those with kidney disease.27 
Simvastatin 40mg, is an alternative. cholesterol synthesis in the liver by inhibit-
ing HMGCOA reductase. CI: porphyria, cholestasis, pregnancy. SE: myalgia ± myositis 
(stop if CK ≥10-fold; if any myalgia, check CK; risk is 1 per 100 000 treatment-years),28 
abdominal pain, and LFTS (stop if AST 100U/L). Cytochrome P450 inhibitors (p689) 
serum concentrations (200mL of grapefruit juice simvastatin concentration by 
300%, and atorvastatin 80%, but pravastatin is almost unchanged). Current guide-
lines suggest a target plasma cholesterol reduction of ≥40 % in those with CVD.
  • 2nd-line therapy: Ezetimibe—a cholesterol absorption inhibitor, may be used in 

statin intolerance or combination with statins to achive target reduction.

  • 3rd-line  therapy:  Alirocumab—a  monoclonal  antibody  against  PCSK9  (acts  to 
reduce hepatocyte LDL receptor expression). Very eff ective in reducing LDL,29 but 
expensive and needs to be given by injection every 2 weeks. Others: ﬁ brates, eg 
bezaﬁ brate (useful in mixed hyperlipidaemias); anion exchange resins, eg colesty-
ramine;  nicotinic  acid  (HDL; LDL;  SE:  severe  ﬂ ushes;  aspirin  300mg  ½h  pre-dose 
helps this).

  • Hypertriglyceridaemia: Responds best to ﬁ brates, nicotinic acid, or ﬁ sh oil.
Xanthomata These yellow lipid deposits may be: eruptive (itchy nodules in crops 
in hypertriglyceridaemia); tuberous (plaques on elbows and knees); or planar—also 
called palmar (orange streaks in palmar creases), ‘diagnostic’ of remnant hyperlipid-
aemia; or in tendons (p38), eyelids (xanthelasma, see ﬁ g 14.13), or cornea (arcus, p39).

3  Abbreviations: (V)LDL = (very) low-density lipoprotein; IDL = intermediate-density lipoprotein;
HDL = high-density lipoprotein; chol = cholesterol; trig = trigylcerides.

_OHCM_10e.indb   690

_OHCM_10e.indb   690

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Primary hyperlipidaemias
Table 14.8  Classiﬁ cation of primary hyperlipidaemias

Familial hyperchylomicronae-
mia (lipoprotein lipase deﬁ -
ciency or apoCII deﬁ ciency)I

Familial hypercholesterol-
aemiaII
(LDL receptor defects)
Familial defective
apolipoprotein B-100IIa

Common hypercholesterol-
aemiaIIa

Chol <6.5
Trig 10–30
Chylomicrons 
Chol 7.5–16
Trig <2.3

LDL

Chol 7.5–16
Trig <2.3
Chol 6.5–9
Trig <2.3

LDL

LDL

Familial combined hyper-
lipidaemiaIIb, IV, OR V

Dysbetalipoproteinaemia 
(remnant particle disease)III

Chol 6.5–10
Trig 2.3–12
Chol 9–14
Trig 9–14
Chol 6.5–12
Trig 3.0–6.0
Type V hyperlipoprotein aemia Trig 10–30;

Familial hypertriglyceridae-
miaIV

LDL VLDL
HDL
IDL
HDL LDL
VLDL

chylomicrons 
found

Eruptive xanthomata; 
lipaemia retinalis; 
hepatosplenomegaly

Tendon xanthoma;
corneal arcus; 
xanthelasma
Tendon xanthoma;
arcus; xanthelasma

The commonest 1°
lipidaemia; may have 
xanthelasma or arcus
Next commonest 1° lipid-
aemia; xanthelasma; arcus

Palmar striae; tubero-
eruptive xanthoma

Eruptive xanthomata; 
lipaemia retinalis; 
hepatosplenomegaly

691

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

Blue superscript numbers = WHO phenotype; chol/trig levels given in mmol/L.
Primary HDL abnormalities:
  • Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia: HDL, chol >2.
  • Hypoalphalipoproteinaemia (Tangier disease): HDL, chol <0.92.
Primary LDL abnormalities:
  • Abetalipoproteinaemia (ABL): trig <0 . 3, chol <1 . 3, missing LDL, VLDL, and chylomicrons. 
Autosomal recessive disorder of fat malabsorption causing vitamin A & E deﬁ ciency, 
with retinitis pigmentosa, sensory neuropathy, ataxia, pes cavus, and acanthocytosis.
  • Hypobetalipoproteinaemia: chol <1 . 5, LDL, HDL. Autosomal codominant disorder 
of apolipoprotein B metabolism. longevity in heterozygotes. Homozygotes pre-
sent with a similar clinical picture to ABL.

Fig 14.13  Xanthelasma. Xanthos is Greek for yellow, and elasma means plate. Xanthelasmata are 
lipid-laden yellow plaques, typically a few millimetres wide. They congregate around the lids, or 
just below the eyes, and signify hyperlipidaemia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   691

_OHCM_10e.indb   691

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
692

The porphyrias

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l

a
c
i
n

i
l

C

The porphyrias are a heterogenous group of rare diseases caused by various er-
rors of haem biosynthesis (produced when iron is chelated into protoporphyrin IX), 
which may be genetic or acquired. Depending on the stage in haem biosynthesis that 
is faulty, there is accumulation of either porphyrinogens, which are unstable and 
oxidize  to  porphyrins,  or  their  precursors,  porphobilinogen  and  -aminolaevulinic 
acid. Porphyrin precursors are neurotoxic, while porphyrins themselves induce pho-
tosensitivity and the formation of toxic free radicals.
  • Alcohol, lead, and iron deﬁ ciency cause abnormal porphyrin metabolism.
  • Genetic counselling (OHCS p154) should be off ered to all patients and their families.
Acute porphyrias Occur when the accumulation of porphyrinogen precursors pre-
dominates, and are characterized by acute neurovisceral crises, though some forms 
have additional photosensitive cutaneous manifestations.
Acute intermittent porphyria: (‘The Madness of King George.’) A low-penetrant 
autosomal  dominant  condition  (porphobilinogen  deaminase  gene);  28%  have  no 
family  history  (de  novo  mutations).  ~10%  of  those  with  the  defective  gene  have 
neurovisceral  symptoms.  Attacks  are  intermittent,  more  common  in  women  and 
those aged 18–40, and may be precipitated by drugs. Urine porphobilinogens are 
raised during attacks (the urine may go deep red on standing) and also, in ~50%, be-
tween attacks. Faecal porphyrin levels are normal. There is never cutaneous photo-
sensitivity. It is the commonest form of porphyria—prevalence in UK: 1–2/100 000.
Variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria: Autosomal dominant, char-
acterized by photosensitive blistering skin lesions and/or acute attacks. The former 
is prevalent in Afrikaners in South Africa. Porphobilinogen is high only during an 
attack, and other metabolites may be detected in faeces.
Triggers of an acute attack: Include infection, starvation (including pre-operative 
‘nil-by-mouth’), reproductive hormones (pregnancy, premenstrual), smoking, anaes-
thesia, and cytochrome P450 enzyme inducers (alcohol, and other drugs—see BOX).
Features of an acute attack:
  • Gastrointestinal: abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation.
  • Neuropsychiatric: peripheral neuropathy (weakness, hypotonia, pain, numbness), 
seizures (often associated with severe Na+), psychosis (or other odd behaviour).4
  • Cardiovascular: hypertension, tachycardia, shock (due to sympathetic overactivity).
  • Other:  fever,  Na+,  K+,  proteinuria,  urinary  porphobilinogens,  discoloured  urine. 

Rare but serious complications include bulbar and respiratory paralysis.

Beware the ‘acute abdomen’ in acute intermittent porphyria: colic, vomiting, fever, 
and WCC—so mimicking an acute surgical abdomen. Anaesthesia could be disastrous.
Treatment of an acute attack:
  • Remove precipitants (review medications; treat intercurrent illness/infection).
  • IV ﬂ uids to correct electrolyte imbalance.
  • High carbohydrate intake (eg Hycal®) by NG tube, or IV if necessary.
  • IV haematin is 1st-line (inhibits production of porphyrinogen precursors).
  • Nausea controlled with prochlorperazine 12.5mg IM.
  • Sedate if necessary with chlorpromazine 50–100mg PO/IM.
  • Pain control with opiate or opioid analgesia (avoid oxycodone).
  • Seizures can be controlled with diazepam (although this will prolong the attack).
  • Treat tachycardia and hypertension with a -blocker.
Non-acute porphyrias
Porphyria  cutanea  tarda  (PCT),  erythropoietic  protoporphyria,  and  congenital 
erythro poietic  porphyria  are  characterized  by  cutaneous  photosensitivity  alone, 
as there is no overproduction of porphyrinogen precursors, only porphyrins. PCT pre-
sents in adults with blistering skin lesions ± facial hypertrichosis and hyperpigmen-
tation. Total plasma porphyrins and LFTS are . Screen for associated disorders: hep 
C, HIV, iron overload, hepatocellular ca. : phlebotomy, iron chelators, chloroquine, 
sunscreens.

_OHCM_10e.indb   692

_OHCM_10e.indb   692

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Drugs to avoid in acute intermittent porphyria
There are many, many drugs that may precipitate an acute attack ± quadriplegia, 
and this is by no means an exhaustive list (see BNF/Oxford Textbook of Medicine).
 For an up-to-date list of drugs considered safe in acute porphyria see www.wmic.

693

wales.nhs.uk/porphyria-safe-list-may-2016/

  • Diclofenac
  • Alcohol
  • Oral contraceptive pill  & HRT
  • Tricyclic antidepressants
  • Benzodiazepines
  • Anaesthetic agents (barbiturates, halothane)
  • Antibiotics (cephalosporins, sulfonamides, macrolides, tetracyclines, rifampicin, 

trimethoprim, chloramphenicol, metronidazole)

  • Metoclopramide
  • ACE-inhibitors
  • Ca2+-channel blockers
  • Statins
  • Anticonvulsants
  • Furosemide
  • Sulfonylureas
  • Lidocaine
  • Gold salts
  • Antihistamines
  • Amphetamines.

y
r
t
s
i
m
e
h
c
l
a
c
i
n

i
l

C

4  Be sure I looked at her eyes
  Happy and proud; at last I knew
Porphyria worshipped me; surprise
  Made my heart swell, and still it grew
  While I debated what to do.
That moment she was mine, mine, fair,
  Perfectly pure and good: I found
A thing to do, and all her hair
  In one long yellow string I wound
  Three times her little throat around,
And strangled her …

From Porphyria’s Lover by Robert Browning.

_OHCM_10e.indb   693

_OHCM_10e.indb   693

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
15  Eponymous syndromes

Fig 15.1  ‘No scientiﬁ c discovery is named af-
ter  its  original  discoverer’,  asserts  Professor 
Stephen Stigler in ‘Stigler’s Law of Eponymy ’, 
and  in  doing  so,  names  the  sociologist  RK 
Merton  as  its  discoverer—deliberately  mak-
ing Stigler’s law exemplify itself. Is the same 
true in medicine? At least six others described 
Alzheimer’s  disease  before  Alois  Alzheimer 
in  1906,  and  Tetralogy  of  Fallot  (named  after 
Étienne-Louis  Fallot  in  1888)  was  ﬁ rst  de-
scribed in 1672 by Niels Stenson. Not all medical 
eponyms obey Stigler’s law. Forty years after 
it  was  ﬁ rst  described,  the  French  neurologist 
Jean-Marie Charcot (himself associated with at least 15 medical eponyms) attributed the name 
‘Parkinson’s Disease’ to the illness outlined in James Parkinson’s 1817 essay ‘The Shaking Palsy ’. 
Monochromatic doctors may try to abolish eponyms by regimenting them to histologically driven 
disease titles. But classiﬁ cations vary as facts emerge, and as a result the renaming of non-eponyms 
becomes essential. Eponyms, however, carry on forever, because they imply nothing about causes.

Alice in Wonderland syndrome Altered perception in size and shape of body parts 
or objects ± an impaired sense of passing time—as experienced by Alice in Lewis Car-
roll’s novel. Seen in epilepsy, migraine, and cerebral lesions.1,2Alice Pleasance Liddell, 1865–1934
Arnold–Chiari  malformation  Malformed  cerebellar  tonsils  and  medulla  herniate 
through the foramen magnum. This may cause infantile hydrocephalus with mental 
retardation, optic atrophy, ocular palsies, and spastic paresis of the limbs. Spina biﬁ da, 
syringomyelia (p516), or focal cerebellar and brainstem signs may occur (p499). There 
may be bony abnormalities of the base of the skull. Often presents in early adulthood. 
MRI aids diagnosis.  
Julius Arnold, 1835–1915 (German pathologist); Hans Chiari, 1851–1916 (Austrian pathologist)
Baker’s  cyst  Fluid  from  a  knee  eff usion  escapes  to  form  a  popliteal  cyst  (often 
swollen and painful) in a sub-gastrocnemius bursa.3 Usually secondary to degen-
eration.  :  DVT (exclude if calf swelling); sarcoma. Imaging:  USS;  MRI. : None if 
asymptomatic. NSAIDS/ice if painful. Spontaneous resolution may take 10–20 months. 
Arthroscopy + cystectomy may be needed. 
William M Baker, 1838–1896 (British surgeon)
Bazin’s disease (Erythema induratum.) Localized areas of fat necrosis that pro-
duce painful, ﬁ rm nodules ± ulceration and an indur ated rash, characteristically on 
adolescent girls’ calves. It is associated with TB. Nodular vasculitis is a variant unre-
lated to TB.4  
Pierre-Antoine-Ernest Bazin, 1807–1878 (French dermatologist)
Behçet’s disease A systemic inﬂ ammatory disorder of unknown cause, associated 
with HLA-B5. It is most common along the old Silk Road, from the Mediterranean 
to China. Features: Recurrent oral and genital ulceration, uveitis, skin lesions (eg 
erythema  nodosum,  papulopustular  lesions);  arthritis  (non-erosive  large  joint  oli-
goarthropathy); thrombophlebitis; vasculitis; myo/pericarditis; CNS involvement (py-
ramidal signs); and colitis.  Diagnosis:  Mainly clinical. Pathergy test: needle prick 
leads to papule formation within 48hrs. : Colchicine for orogenital ulceration; ster-
oids, azathioprine/cyclophosphamide for systemic disease. Inﬂ iximab has a role in 
ocular disease unresponsive to topical steroids.5  
Hulusi Behçet, 1889–1948 (Turkish dermatologist)
Berger’s disease (IgA  nephropathy, p311.) Ranges from invisible haematuria to 
rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Biopsy shows mesangial IgA deposition. Usu-
ally indolent disease, but progression to end-stage renal failure occurs. : ACE-i/ARB if 
BP or proteinuria. Immunosuppression considered for progressive disease.6 

Jean Berger, 1930–2011 (French nephrologist)
Bickerstaff  ’s brainstem encephalitis Ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, areﬂ exia, and ex-
tensor plantars ± tetra plegia ± coma, and a reversible brain death picture (but there 
is no structural damage). MRI: hyperintense brainstem signals. GQ1b antibodies +ve.7 Plas-
mapheresis may help.  
Edwin R Bickerstaff, 1920–2008 (British physician)

We thank Dr Simon Eyre, our Specialist Reader, for his contribution to this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   694

_OHCM_10e.indb   694

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Barrett’s oesophagus
Barrett’s oesophagus is metaplasia of the normal stratiﬁ ed squamous epithelium of 
the distal oesophagus to a columnar epithelium, as a result of chronic GORD (p254). 
Estimates of prevalence vary widely, but in patients with a history of symptomatic 
GORD, rates of ≈8% have been reported. Importantly, screening studies in asympto-
matic individuals have reported rates of ≈6%. General population-based screening is 
not recommended, although screening endoscopy may be considered in individuals 
with chronic GORD symptoms and multiple risk factors (>50 years old, obesity, , 
white race, family history of Barrett's or oesophageal adenocarcinoma). Diagnosis: 
Biopsy of endoscopically visible columnarization allows histological corroboration. 
The  length  should  be  recorded  (using  the  Prague  classiﬁ cation).  Management: 
Focus  on  detecting  and  preventing  the  most  signiﬁ cant  associated  morbidity: 
oesophageal adenocarcinoma. The risk of progression is low (0.1–0.4% per patient 
per year, much lower than previously suggested). Risk factors for malignant trans-
formation include age, , long segment of oesophagus involved, and evidence of 
dysplasia. Endoscopic surveillence for dysplasia is controversial and the evidence 
base is lacking. Current guidelines suggest that patients without dysplasia and in 
whom the length of involved oesophagus is <3cm should be considered for discharge 
from surveillance programmes, depending on the precise histology.8 For those with 
more extensive disease, endoscopic assessment every 2–3 years is appropriate. If 
high-grade dysplasia or intramural carcinoma is detected, endoscopic resection or 
mucosal radiofrequency abl ation (RFA) is recommended. If low-grade dysplasia is 
detected, it should be conﬁ rmed by repeat examination after 6 months and by an 
independent pathologist, prior to RFA.9  
Norman Rupert Barrett, 1903–1979 (British surgeon)

695

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Brugada syndrome
Note right bundle branch block and the unusual 
morphology of the raised ST segments in V1–V3 
(ﬁ g  15.2;  there  are  three  ECG  variants  of  this 
pattern). This predominently autosomal domi-
nant condition causing faulty sodium channels 
predis poses to fatal arrhythmias (eg vent ricular 
ﬁ b rillation),  typically  in  young  males  (eg  trig-
gered by a fever).10 It is preventable by implant-
ing a deﬁ b ril lator. Consider primary electrical 
cardiac  disease  in  all  with  unexplained  syn-
cope.  Program med  electrical  stimul ation  may 
be  needed.   Relatives  of  those  with  sudden 
unex pl ained death may undergo unmask ing of 
arrhythmias by IV ajmaline tests—but some re-
sults are false +ve.  Use judgement in subjecting 
those with  ST abnormalities but no symptoms 
to  electrophysiol ogical  tests,  right  ventric-
ular  myocardial  biopsy,  and  MRI.  Mutations  in 
the  SCN5A  gene  (encodes  the  cardiac  voltage-
gated  Nav1.5  channel)  are  found  in  15–20%. 
Other  mutations  have  also  been  described.11 
Pedro & Josep Brugada, described 1992 (Spanish cardiologists). 

Fig 15.2  Note right bundle branch block and ST 
morph ology in leads V1–3.

Courtesy of Dr Shayashi.

_OHCM_10e.indb   695

_OHCM_10e.indb   695

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
696

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Brown-Séquard syndrome A lesion in one half of the spinal cord (due to hemi-
section or unilateral cord lesion) causes: •Ipsilateral UMN weakness below the lesion 
(severed  corticospinal  tract,  causing  spastic  paraparesis,  brisk  reﬂ exes,  extensor 
plantars). •Ipsilateral loss of proprioception and vibration (dorsal column severed). 
•Contra lateral loss of pain and temperature sensation (severed spinothalamic tract 
which has crossed over; ﬁ g 10.35 p516). Causes: Bullet, stab, tumour, disc hernia, my-
elitis,12 septic emboli. Imaging: MRI. 
Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard, 1817–1894 (Mauritian neurologist)
Budd–Chiari syndrome Hepatic vein obstruction by thrombosis or tumour causes 
congestive ischaemia and hepatocyte damage. Abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, as-
cites, and ALT occur. Portal hypert ension occurs in chronic forms. Causes: Include 
hypercoag ulable  states  (combined  OCP,  pregnancy,  malignancy,  paroxysmal  noc-
turnal haemoglobin uria, polycythaemia, thrombophilia), TB, liver, renal, or adrenal 
tumour. Tests: USS + Dopplers, CT, or MRI. Angioplasty or a transjugular intrahepatic 
porto systemic shunt (TIPSS) may be needed. Anticoagulate (lifelong) unless there are 
varices. Consider liver transplant in fulminant hepatic necrosis or cirrhosis.13   

George Budd, 1808–1882 (British physician); Hans Chiari, 1851–1916 (Austrian pathologist)
Buerger’s  disease  (Thromboangiitis  obliterans.)  Non-atherosclerotic  smoking-
related  inﬂ ammation  and  thrombosis  of  veins  and  middle-sized  arteries  causing 
thrombophlebitis  and  ischaemia  (ulcers,  gangrene).  Cause:  Unknown.  Stopping 
smoking  is  vital.  Most  patients  are  men  aged  20–45yrs  (see  BOX  ‘Poisoning  your 
boss’).  
Leo Buerger, 1879–1943 (US physician)
Caplan’s syndrome Multiple lung nodules in coal workers with RA, caused by an in-
ﬂ ammatory reaction to anthracite (also associated with silica or asbestos exposure). 
CXR: bilateral peri pheral nodules (0.5–5cm).  : TB. 
Anthony Caplan, 1907–1976 (British physician)
Charcot–Marie–Tooth  syndrome  (Peroneal  muscular  atrophy.)  This  inherited 
neuropathy starts in puberty with weak legs and foot drop + variable loss of sensa-
tion and reﬂ exes. The peroneal muscles atrophy, leading to an inverted champagne 
bottle appearance. Atrophy of hand and arm muscles also occurs. The most common 
form, CMT1A (PMP22 myelin gene mutation on chr. 17), has AD inheritance. Quality of life 
is good;  total incapacity rare. Hand pain/paraesthesiae may respond to nerve release. 
 Jean-Marie Charcot, 1825–1893; Pierre Marie, 1853–1940 (French neurologists); Howard H Tooth, 1856–1926 (British physician)
Churg–Strauss  syndrome  (Eosinophilic  granulomatosis  with  polyangiitis.)  A 
triad of adult-onset asthma, eosinophilia, and vasculitis (± vasospasm ± MI ± DVT), 
aff ecting lungs, nerves, heart, and skin. A septic-shock picture/systemic inﬂ amma-
tory  response  syndrome  may  occur  (with  glomerulo neph ritis/renal  failure,  esp.  if 
ANCA +ve). : Steroids; biological agents if refractory disease, eg rituximab.14   

Jacob Churg, 1910–2005; Lotte Strauss, 1913–1985 (US pathologists)
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) The cause is a prion (PrPSc), a misfolded form of a 
normal protein (PrPc), that can transform other proteins into prion proteins (hence its 
infectivity). PrPSc leads to spongiform changes (tiny cavities ± tubulovesicular struc-
tures) in the brain.15 Most cases are sporadic (incidence: 1–3/million/yr). Variant CJD 
(vCJD; ≈225 cases worldwide)16 is transmitted via con tamin ated CNS tissue aff ected by 
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) (see BOX ‘Signs that may distinguish variant 
CJD’). Inherited forms: (eg Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker syndrome, P102L mutation 
in PRNP gene with ataxia ± self-mutilation), the ‘normal’ protein is too unstable, readily 
trans forming to PrPSc. Iatrogenic causes: Cont aminated surgical instruments, corneal 
transplants, growth hormone from human pituitaries, and blood (vCJD only).17 Prion 
protein resists sterilization. Signs: Progressive dementia, focal CNS signs, myoclonus 
(present in 95%),18 depression, eye signs (diplopia, supranuclear palsies, complex visual 
disturbances,  homonymous  ﬁ eld  defects,  hallucinations,  cortical  blind ness).19  Tests: 
Tonsil/olfactory mucosa biopsy;20 CSF gel electrophoresis; MRI. Treatment: None proven. 
Death occurs in ~6 months in sporadic CJD (a little slower in variant CJD). Prevention: 
Regulations to  spread of BSE and transmission to humans +  iatrogenic transmission.
Hans G Creutzfeldt, 1885–1964 (German pathologist); Alfons M Jakob 1884–1931 (German neurologist)
Crigler–Najjar syndrome Two rare syndromes of inherited unconjugated hyper-
bilirubinaemia presenting in the 1st days of life with jaundice ± CNS signs. Cause: 
Mutation in UGT enzyme activity causing absent (type 1) or impaired (type 2; mild) 
ability to excrete bilirubin. : T1: phototherapy and plasmapheresis to control jaun-
dice; liver transplant before irreversible kernicterus (OHCS p115) develops.21 T2: usually 
no  needed. 
John F Crigler 1919–2002; Victor A Najjar b1914 (US paediatricians)

_OHCM_10e.indb   696

_OHCM_10e.indb   696

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
 
697

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Signs that may distinguish variant CJD from sporadic CJD (SCJD)
  • An earlier age at presentation (median 29yrs vs 60yrs in sporadic CJD).
  • Longer survival and later dementia (median 14 months vs 4 for sporadic CJD).
  • Psychiatric features are an early sign (anxiety, withdrawal, apathy, agitation, a 
permanent look of fear in the eyes, depression, personality change, insomnia). 
Hallucinations and delusions may occur—before akinetic mutism.

  • Painful sensory symptoms are commoner (eg foot pain hyperaesthesia).
  • More normal EEG (sporadic CJD has a characteristic spike and wave pattern).
  • Mean CSF tau-pT181/tau protein ratio is 10-fold higher in VCJD than in SCJD.22
  • Homozygosity for methionine at codon 129 of the PRP gene is typical.

Fame and infamy in the search for lost youth
After his neurological experiments, Brown-Séquard, the most visionary of all neu-
roanatomists and the grandfather of HRT, proclaimed he had found the secret of 
perpetual youth after injecting himself with a concoction of testicular blood, se-
men, and testicular extracts from dogs and guinea pigs. In the 1880s, over 12 000 
doctors were queuing up to use his special extracts on patients, which he gave 
away free, provided results were reported back to him. 314 out of 405 cases of spi-
nal syphilis improved, and his own urinary ﬂ ow rate rose by 25%. Endocrin ologists 
never forgave him for bringing their science into disrepute. To this day, no one 
really knows if his (literally) seminal work has given us anything of any practical 
value.  But he might be pleased to know that testosterone is now known to have 
the urodynamic beneﬁ ts he anticipated, at least in men with hypogonadism.23

Like many brilliant men, he had a cruel streak, backing clitoridectomy for preven-
t ing blindness and other imaginary complic ations of ‘masturbatory melan cholia’. 
Had he not been blinded by 19th-century ideas about female sexuality, could he 
have  found  a  marvellous  use  for  his  concoctions,  for  21st-century  ‘hypo active 
sexual desire disorder’? Possibly, but only if he relied on placebo responses.24,25

Poisoning your boss
In 1931, Buerger’s disease caused gangrene in the toes of Harvey Cushing (p224)—
the most cantankerous (and greatest) neurosurgeon ever. He had to be wheeled 
to the operating theatre to carry on his brilliant art (and to continue terrifying his 
assistants).26 He had to retire partially, whereupon his colleagues presented him 
with a magniﬁ cent silver cigarette box, containing 2000 cigarettes (to which he 
was addicted)—one for each brain tumour he had removed during his long career, 
so verifying the truth that although we owe everything to our teachers, we must 
eventually kill them to move out from under their shadow.1

Why bother studying rare diseases? The Liberski imperative...
For centuries, kuru was no bigger than a man’s hand; a cloud barely visible on 
our horizon; a rare disease in cannibals beyond the Paciﬁ c. But meticulous work 
on kuru led to knowledge of prion diseases before the 1990s epidemic of VCJD. If 
in the 1950s, Gajdusek and Zigas had not been intrigued as to why kuru aff ected 
women and children more than men (their strange neural diet was the culprit), the 
discovery of vCJD would have been delayed, as no surveillance would have been in 
place. Neural tissue might still be in our food chain, with dreadful consequences. 
But further than this, the notion of ‘protein-misfolding diseases’2 would have been 
delayed by decades. So this is the lesson: let curiosity ﬂ ourish. This is Liberski’s 
imperative.27 So now let’s scan our horizon for other intriguing clouds.

1  Der Vogel kämpft sich aus dem Ei. Das Ei ist die Welt. Wer geboren werden will, muss eine Welt 
zerstören. The bird struggles out of the egg. The egg is the world. Whoever will be born, must ﬁ rst destroy 
a world. (Hermann Hesse. Demian; 1917.)
2  Cystic ﬁ brosis (misfolded CFTR protein), Marfan’s (misfolded ﬁ brillin),28 Fabry (misfolded -galactosidase), 
Gaucher’s (misfolded -glucocerebrosidase), retinitis pigmentosa 3 (misfolded rhodopsin); some cancers may 
be caused by misfolding of tumour suppressor proteins (von Hippel–Lindau protein).

_OHCM_10e.indb   697

_OHCM_10e.indb   697

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
698

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Devic’s syndrome (Neuromyelitis optica; NMO.) Inﬂ ammatory demyelination caus-
es att acks of optic neuritis ± myelitis.29 Abnormal CSF (may mimic bacterial meningi-
tis) and serum anti-AQP4 antibody (in 65%) help distinguish it from MS30 (table 15.1). 
: IV steroids; plasma exchange. Azathioprine and rituximab31 help prevent relapses. 
Prognosis: Variable; complete remission may occur.   Eugène Devic, 1858–1930 (French neurologist)
Dressler’s syndrome This develops 2–10wks after an  MI, heart surgery (or even 
pacemaker insertion). It is thought that myocardial injury stimulates formation of 
auto antibodies against heart muscle. Symptoms: Recurrent fever and chest pain 
± pleural or pericardial rub (from serositis). Cardiac tamponade may occur, so avoid 
anticoagulants. : Aspirin, NSAIDS, or steroids.  
William Dressler, 1890–1969 (US cardiologist)
Dubin–Johnson syndrome There is defective hepatocyte excretion of conjugated 
bilirubin. Typically presents in late teens with intermittent jaundice ± hepatospleno-
megaly (autosomal recessive). Tests: Bilirubin; ALT and AST are normal; bilirubinuria 
on dipstick; ratio of urinary coproporphyrin I to III. Liver biopsy: diagnostic pigment 
granules.32 : Usually none needed.  
Isadore N Dubin, 1913–1981; Frank B Johnson, b1919 (US pathologists)
Dupuytren’s  contracture  (ﬁ g  15.3)  Progressive  shortening  and  thickening  of  the 
palmar  fascia  causing  ﬁ nger  contracture  and  loss  of  extension  (often  5th  ﬁ nger). 
Prevalence: ~10% of  >65yrs ( if +ve family history). Associations: Smoking, alcohol 
use, heavy manual labour, trauma, DM, phenytoin, HIV. Peyronie’s may coexist (p708). 
It is thought to be caused by local hypoxia. : Collagenase injections.33 Surgery may be
needed. 
Baron Guillaume Dupuytren, 1777–1835 (French surgeon, famed also for treating Napoleon’s haemorrhoids)
Ekbom’s  syndrome  (Restless  legs.)  Criteria:  1  Compelling  desire  to  move  legs. 
2 Worse at night. 3 Relieved by movement. 4 Unpleasant leg sensations (eg shoot-
ings or tinglings) worse at rest. Mechanism: Endogenous opioid system fault causes 
altered central processing of pain. Prevalence: 1–3%. :≈2:1. Associations: Iron 
deﬁ ciency, uraemia, pregnancy, DM, polyneurop athy, RA, COPD. Exclude: Cramps, posi-
tional discomfort, and local leg pathology. : Dopamine agonists are commonly used; 
also, anticonvulsants, opioids, and benzodiazepines.34

Karl Axel Ekbom, 1907–1977 (Swedish neurologist)

Fabry  disease  X-linked  lysosomal  storage  disorder  caused  by  abnormalities  in 
the  GLA gene, leading to a deﬁ ciency in -galactosidase  A. There is accumulation 
of glycosphingolipids in skin (angiokeratoma classically in a 'swimming trunk' dis-
tribution),  eyes  (corneal  verticillata),  heart  (hypertrophy,  mitral  valve  prolapse, 
dilated aortic root, arrhythmias, angina), kidneys (renal failure, p320), CNS (stroke) 
and nerves (neuropathy/acro paraesthesia). Prior to enzyme replacement, premature 
death in the 6th decade was due to CV and renal disease. : Enzyme replacement 
therapy with  or  human agalsidase.35 
Johannes Fabry, 1860–1930 (German dermatologist)
Fanconi anaemia Autosomal recessive, defective stem cell repair & chromosomal 
fragility leads to aplastic anaemia, risk of AML and breast ca (BRCA2), skin pigmenta-
tion, absent radii, short stature, microcephaly, syndactyly, deafness, IQ, hypopituita-
rism, and crypt orchidism. : Stem-cell transplant.  Guido Fanconi, 1892–1979 (Swiss paediatrician)
Felty’s syndrome A triad of rheumatoid arthritis  + WCC + splenomegaly (±hyper-
splenism, causing anaemia and platelets), recurrent infections, skin ulcers, and lym-
phadenopathy. 95% are Rh factor +ve. Splenectomy may raise the wcc. : DMARDS 
(p547) ± rituximab if refractory.36 
Augustus Roi Felty, 1895–1964 (US physician)
Fitz-Hugh–C urtis syndrome Liver capsule inﬂ ammation causing RUQ pain due to 
transabdominal spread of chlamydial or gonococcal infection, often with PID ± ‘violin-
string’ adhesions. : Antibiotics for PID (+ treat sexual partners) ± laparoscopic divi-
sion of adhesions. 
Thomas Fitz-Hugh, 1894–1963 (US physician); Arthur H Curtis, 1881–1955 (US gynaecologist)
Foster Kennedy syndrome Optic atrophy of one eye due to optic nerve compression 
(most commonly from an olfactory groove meningioma), with papilloedema of the 
other eye secondary to ICP. There is also central scotoma and anosmia. 

Robert Foster Kennedy, 1884–1952 (British neurologist)
Friedreich’s ataxia Expansions of the trinucleotide repeat GAA in the frataxin gene 
(recessive) causes degeneration of many nerve tracts: spinocerebellar tracts degener-
ate causing cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus, and dysdiado chokinesis. Loss of 
corticospinal tracts occurs (weakness and extensor plantar response) with peripheral 

_OHCM_10e.indb   698

_OHCM_10e.indb   698

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Devic’s syndrome and multiple sclerosis
Table 15.1  Distinguishing Devic’s syndrome from multiple sclerosis

Course
Attack severity
Respiratory failure
MRI head

Devic’s syndrome
Monophasic or relapsing
Usually severe
~30%, from cervical myelitis Rare
Usually normal

Multiple sclerosis
Relapsing usually; see p496
Often mild

MRI cord lesions
CSF oligoclonal bands
Permanent disability
Other autoimmunities In ≤50% (eg Sjögren’s)

Longitudinal, central
Absent
Unusual, and attack-related

Many periventricular white-
matter lesions
Multiple, small, peripheral
Present
In late progressive disease
Uncommon

Diagnostic criteria for Devic’s Optic neuritis, myelitis, and ≥2 out of 3 of: •MRI 
evidence of a continuous cord lesion for ≥3 segments. •Brain MRI at onset non-
diagnostic for MS. •NMO-IgG (anti-AQP4) serum or CSF positivity (poorer prognosis).
NB: CNS involvement beyond the optic nerves and cord is compatible with NMO.

699

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.3  Dupuytren’s contracture of the 5th ﬁ nger. 
Note scar from previous surgery to the index ﬁ nger.

_OHCM_10e.indb   699

_OHCM_10e.indb   699

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
700

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

nerve damage, so tendon reﬂ exes are paradoxically depressed (diff erential diagnosis 
p446). There is also dorsal column degeneration, with loss of positional and vibration 
sense. Pes cavus and scoliosis occur. Cardiomyopathy may cause CCF. Typical age at 
death: ~50yrs. : There is no cure. Treat CCF, arrhythmias, and DM.   

Nikolaus Friedreich, 1825–1882 (German neurologist)
Froin’s syndrome  CSF protein + xanthochromia with normal cell count—a sign of 
blockage in spinal CSF ﬂ ow (eg from a spinal tumour). Georges Froin, 1874–1932 (French physician)
Gardner’s  syndrome  A  dominant  variant  of  familial  adenomatous  polyposis, 
caused by mutations in the APC gene (5q21). There are multiple colon polyps (which 
inevitably  become  malignant;  p520),37  benign  bone  osteomas,  epidermal  cysts, 
dermoid  tumours,  ﬁ bromas,  and  neuroﬁ bromas.  Fundoscopy  reveals  black  spots 
(congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium); this helps pre-symptomatic 
detection.  Presentation:  Can  present  from  2–70yrs  with  colonic  (eg  bloody  diar-
rhoea) or extracolonic symptoms. Prophylactic surgery (eg proctocolectomy) is the 
only curative treatment. Endoscopic polypectomy with long-term celecoxib therapy 
has been used to postpone prophylactic colectomy.38  Eldon J Gardner, 1909–1989 (US physician)
Gélineau’s syndrome (Narcolepsy.) The patient, usually a young man, succumbs 
to  irresistible  attacks  of  inappropriate  sleep ± vivid  hypnogogic  hallucinations, 
cataplexy (sudden hypotonia), and sleep paralysis (paralysis of speech and move-
ment, while fully alert, at sleep onset or on waking). Hypothesis: Mutations lead to 
loss of hypothalamic hypocretin-containing neurons, via autoimmune des truction.39 
95% are +ve for  HLA DR2. : Stimulants (eg methylphenidate) may cause depend-
ence ± psychosis. Modaﬁ nil may be better. SE: anxiety, aggression, dry mouth, eupho-
ria, insomnia, BP, dyskinesia, ALP.  
Jean-Baptiste-Édouard Gélineau, 1828–1906 (French physician)
Gerstmann’s syndrome A constellation of symptoms suggesting a dominant pari-
etal lesion: ﬁ nger agnosia (inability to identify ﬁ ngers), agraphia (inability to write), 
acalculia (inability to calculate), and left–right disorientation. 

Josef Gerstmann, 1887–1969 (Austrian neurologist)
Gilbert’s syndrome A common cause of unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia due to  
UGT-1 activity (the enzyme that conjugates bilirubin with glucuronic acid). Prevalence: 
1–2%; 5–15% have a family history of jaundice. It may go unnoticed for many years 
and usually presents in adolescence with intermittent jaundice occuring during illness, 
exercise or fasting. Diagnosis: Mild bilirubin; normal FBC and reticulocytes (ie no hae-
molysis). It is a benign condition. 
Nicolas Augustin Gilbert, 1858–1927 (French physician)
Gilles de la Tourette syndrome Tonic, clonic, dystonic, or phonic tics: jerks, blinks, 
sniff s, nods, spitting, stuttering, irrep ressible explosive obscene verbal ejaculations 
(coprolalia, in 20%) or gestures (coprophilia, 6%),40 grunts, squeaks, burps, twirlings, 
and nipping others ± tantrums. There may be a witty, innovatory, phantasmago-
ric picture, with mimicry (echopraxia), antics, impishness, extravagance, audacity, 
dram atizations,  surreal  associations,  uninhibited  aff ect,  speed,  ‘go’,  vivid  imagery 
and memory, and hunger for stimuli. The tic paradox: Tics are voluntary, but often 
unwanted: the desire to tic stems from the relief of the odd sensation that builds up 
prior to the tic and is relieved by it, ‘like scratching a mosquito bite, tics lead to more 
tics’.41 Mean age of onset: 6yrs. :≈4:1. Pathogenesis: Unknown; multiple genetic 
loci implicated and neuroanatomical abnormalities reported on MRI. Ass ociations: 
Obsessive–compulsive  disorder;  attention  deﬁ cit  hyperactivity  disorder.  :  (None 
may  be  wanted.)  Ris peridone,  haloperidol,  or  pimozide.  Habit-reversal  training.42 
Deep brain stimulation is rarely indicated, but may help. 

Marquis Georges Albert Édouard Brutus Gilles de la Tourette, 1857–1904 (French neurologist)
Goodpasture’s  disease  (A  pulmonary-renal  syndrome.)  Acute  glomerulone-
phritis + lung symptoms (haemop tysis/diff use pulmonary haemorrhage) caused by 
antiglom erular basement mem brane antibodies (binding kidney’s basement mem-
brane  and  alveolar  membrane).  Tests:  CXR:  inﬁ ltrates  due  to  pulmonary  haemor-
rhage, often in lower zones. Kidney biopsy: crescentic glomerulonephritis. : Treat 
shock. Vigorous imm unosuppressive treatment and plasmapheresis. 

Ernest William Goodpasture, 1886–1960 (US pathologist)

_OHCM_10e.indb   700

_OHCM_10e.indb   700

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cataplexy is highly speciﬁ c for narcolepsy/Gélineau’s syndrome
Daytime sleepiness has many causes, but if it occurs with cataplexy the diagno-
sis ‘must’ be narcolepsy. Cataplexy is bilateral loss of tone in antigravity muscles 
provoked by emotions such as laughter, startle, excitement, or anger. Associated 
phenomena include: falls, mouth opening, dysarthria, mutism, and phasic muscle 
jerking around the mouth. Most attacks are brief, but injury can occur (eg if sever-
al attacks per day). It is comparable to the atonia of rapid eye movement sleep but 
without loss of awareness.  : bradycardia, migraine, atonic/akinetic epilepsy,  
delayed sleep phase syndrome, conversion disorder, malingering, and psychosis. 

Don’t confuse cataplexy with catalepsy—a waxy ﬂ exibility where involuntary 
statue-like postures are eff ortlessly maintained (frozen) despite looking most un-
comfortable. 

701

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   701

_OHCM_10e.indb   701

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
702

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

(Acute 

syndrome 

G uillain–Barré 
inﬂ ammatory  demyelinating  poly-
neuropathy.)43,44 (table 15.2) Incidence: 1–2/100 000/yr. Signs: A few weeks after an in-
fection a symmetrical ascending muscle weakness starts. Triggers: Campylobacter 
jejuni, CMV, mycoplasma, zoster, HIV, EBV, vaccinations. The trigger causes antibodies 
which attack nerves. In 40%, no cause is found. It may advance quickly, aff ecting all 
limbs at once, and can lead to paralysis. There is a progressive phase of up to 4 weeks, 
followed by recovery. Unlike other neuropathies, proximal muscles are more aff ected, 
eg trunk, respiratory, and cranial nerves (esp. VII). Pain is common (eg back, limb) but 
sensory signs may be absent. Autonomic dysfunction: Sweating, pulse, BP changes, 
arrhythmias. Nerve conduction studies: Slow conduction. CSF: Protein (eg >5.5g/L), 
normal CSF white cell count. Respiratory involvement (the big danger) requires trans-
fer to ITU. Do forced vital capacity (FVC) 4-hourly. Ventilate sooner rather than 
later, eg if FVC <1.5L, PaO2 <10kPa, PaCO2 >6kPa. : IV immunoglobulin 0.4g/kg/24h for 
5d. Plasma exchange is good too (?more SE).45 Steroids have no role. Prognosis: Good; 
~85% make a complete or near-complete recovery. 10% are unable to walk alone 
at 1yr. Complete paralysis is compatible with complete recovery. Mortality: 10%. 
George C Guillain, 1876–1961; Jean-Alexandre Barré, 1880–1967 (French neurologists)
Henoch–Schönlein  purpura  (HSP)  (ﬁ g  15.5)  A  small  vessel  vasculitis,  presenting 
with  purpura  (non-blanching  purple  papules  due  to  intradermal  bleeding),  often 
over buttocks and extensor surfaces, typically aff ecting young . There may be glo-
merulonephritis (p310), arthritis, and abdominal pain (± intussusception), which may 
mimic an ‘acute abdomen’. : Mostly supportive.  

Eduard H Henoch, 1820–1910 (German paediatrician); Johann L Schönlein, 1793–1864 (German physician)
Horner’s syndrome A triad of 1 miosis (pupil constriction, ﬁ g 15.4) 2 partial ptosis 
(drooping upper eyelid) + apparent enophthalmos (sunken eye) 3 anhidrosis (ip-
silateral loss of sweating). Due to interruption of the face’s sympathetic supply, eg 
at the brainstem (demyelination, vascular disease), cord (syringo myelia), thoracic 
outlet (Pancoast’s tumour, p708), or on the sympathetic’s trip on the internal carotid 
artery into the skull (ﬁ g 15.6), and orbit.   Johann Friedrich Horner, 1831–1886 (Swiss ophthalmologist)
Huntington’s disease Incurable, progressive, autosomal dominant, neurodegenera-
tive disorder presenting in middle age, often with prodromal phase of mild symptoms 
(irritability, depression, incoordination). Progresses to chorea, dementia ± ﬁ ts & death 
(within ~15yrs of diagnosis). Pathology: Atrophy and neuronal loss of striatum and 
cortex. Genetic basis: Expansion of CAG repeat on Chr. 4. : (p87.) No treatment pre-
vents progression. Counselling for patient and family.46 

George Huntington, 1850–1916 (US physician)
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome Congenital, bilateral, autosomal recessive, 
sensorineural deafness, and long QT interval (p96, hence syncope, VT, torsades, ± sud-
den death—50% by age 15 if untreated). KCNQ1 or KCNE1 gene mutation causes K+ chan-
nelopathy. : -blocker, pacemaker, ICD, cochlear implants.47 

Anton Jervell, 1901–1987; Fred Lange-Nielsen, 1919–1989 (Norwegian physicians)
Kaposi’s  sarcoma  (KS)  A  spindle-cell  tumour  derived  from  capillary  endothel ial 
cells, caused by human herpes virus 8 (=Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus 
KSHV). It presents as purple papules (½–1cm) or plaques on skin (ﬁ g 15.7) and mucosa 
(look in mouth, but any organ). It metastasizes to nodes. There are four types: 1 Clas-
sic, a rare disease of the elderly. 2 Endemic, a disease of children documented prior 
to HIV. 3 Iatrogenic KS due to immunosuppression, eg organ transplant recipients. 
4 AIDS-associated KS. Usually presents with low CD4 count and can indicate failure 
of  HAART (p402). However  ⅓ presents in HIV with near normal  CD4 counts and an 
undetectable viral load. Initiation of HAART with rapid immune system constitution 
can precipitate KS. Lung KS may present in HI V +ve men and women as dyspnoea and 
haemoptysis. Bowel KS may cause nausea, abdominal pain. Rare sites: CNS, larynx, 
eye, glands, heart, breast, wounds, or biopsy sites. : Biopsy. : Optimize HAART, local 
radiotherapy, surgical excision, intralesional therapy (vincristine, bleomycin), topical 
retinoids, interferon alfa, interleukin-12. Current research includes thalidomide, VEGF 
monoclonal antibodies, and sirolimus. 
Moricz Kaposi, 1837–1902 (Hungarian dermatologist)

_OHCM_10e.indb   702

_OHCM_10e.indb   702

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
 
Guillain–Barré polyneuritis
Table 15.2  Diagnostic criteria

Features required for
Progressive weakness of >1 limb
Areﬂ exia
Features making diagnosis doubtful
 • Sensory level
 • Marked, persistent asymmetry of 

weakness

 • Severe bowel and bladder dysfunction
 • CSF WCC >50

Features supporting diagnosis
 • Progression over days, up to 4wks
 • Near symmetry of sytoms
 • Sensory symptoms/signs only mild
 • CN involvement (eg bilateral facial weakness)
 • Recovery starts ~2wks after the period of 

progression has ﬁ nished
 • Autonomic dysfunction
 • Absence of fever at onset
 • CSF protein  with CSF WCC <10≈106/L
 • Typical electrophysiological tests

Variants of Guillain–Barré syndrome include:
Chronic inﬂ ammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy (CIDP): Character ized 
by a slower onset and recovery.
Miller Fisher syndrome: Comprises of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and areﬂ exia. As-
sociated with anti-GQ1b antibodies in the serum.

703

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig  15.4  Right  Horner’s:  everything  reduces: 
pupil, eye, sweating, etc.

Fig 15.5  Henoch–Schönlein vasculitis.

Fig 15.6  Pathways in Horner’s syndrome.

Fig 15.7  Kaposi’s sarcoma.

Reproduced from Oxford Handbook of Medical 
Dermatology, 2010, with permission from Oxford 
University Press. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   703

_OHCM_10e.indb   703

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
704

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Klippel–Trénaunay syndrome A triad of port wine stain, varicose veins, and limb 
hypertrophy, due to vascular malformation. Usually sporadic (although AD inherit-
ance has been reported).48 
Maurice Klippel, 1858–1942; Paul Trénaunay, 1875–1938 (French physicians)
Korsakoff  ’s syndrome Hypothalamic damage & cerebral atrophy due to thiamine 
(vitamin B1) deﬁ ciency (eg in alcoholics). May accompany Wernicke’s encephalopa-
thy.  There  is  ability  to  acquire  new  memories,  confabulation  (invented  memory, 
owing to retrograde amnesia), lack of insight & apathy. : See Wernicke’s, p714; 
patients rarely recover. 
Sergei Sergeievich Korsakoff, 1853–1900 (Russian neuropsychiatrist)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Histiocytosis X.) A group of single- (73%, eg bone) or 
multisystem (27%) disorders, with inﬁ ltrating granulomas containing dendritic (Langer-
hans) cells. : ≈1.5:1; at-risk organs are liver, lung, spleen, marrow. Pulmonary disease 
presents with pneumothorax or pulmonary hypertension. CXR/CT: nodules and cysts + 
honeycombing in upper and middle zones. : Biopsy (skin, lung). : Local excision, ster-
oids, vinblastine ± etoposide if severe.49 OHCS p644. 
Paul Langerhans, 1847–1888 (German pathologist)
Leriche’s syndrome Absent femoral pulse, claudication/wasting  of the buttock, a 
pale cold leg, and erectile dysfunction from aorto-iliac occlusive dis ease, eg a saddle 
embolus at the aortic bifurcation. Surgery may help. 
René Leriche, 1879–1955 (French surgeon)
Löffl  er’s  eosinophilic  endocarditis  Restrictive  cardiomyopathy  +  eosinophilia 
(eg 120 ≈ 109/L). It may be an early stage of tropical endomyocardial ﬁ brosis (and 
overlaps with hypereosinophilic syndrome, p330) but is distinct from eosinophilic 
leuk aemia. Signs: Heart failure (75%) ± mitral regurgitation (49%) ± heart block. : 
Suppress the eosin ophilia (prednisolone ± hydroxycarbamide), and then treat with 
anti-heart failure medication. 
Wilhelm Löfﬂ er, 1887–1972 (Swiss physician)
Löffl  er’s syndrome (Pulmonary eosinophilia.) An allergic inﬁ ltration of the lungs 
by eosinophils. Allergens include: Ascaris lumbricoides, Trichinella spiralis, Fasciola 
hep atica,  Strongyloides,  Ankylostoma,  Toxocara,  Clonorchis  sinensis,   sulfonam-
ides, hydralazine, and nitrofurantoin. Often symptomless with incidental CXR (diff use 
fan-shaped shadows), or cough, fever, eosinophilia (in ~20%) & larval migrans (p433). 
: Eradicate cause. Steroids (if idiopathic). 
Wilhelm Löfﬂ er, 1887–1972 (Swiss physician)
Lown–Ganong–Levine syndrome A pre-excitation syndrome, similar to Wolf–Par-
kinson–White (WPW, p133), characterized by a short PR interval (<0.12sec), a normal 
QRS complex (as opposed to the -waves of WPW), and risk of supraventricular tachy-
cardia (but not AF/ﬂ utter). The cause is not completely understood, but may be due 
to paranodal ﬁ bres that bypass all or part of the atrioventricular node. The patient 
may complain of intermittent palpitations.50 
 Bernard Lown, b1921 (US cardiologist); William F Ganong, 1924–2007 (US physiologist); Samuel A Levine, 1891–1966 (US cardiologist)
McArdle’s glycogen storage disease (type V) Absence of muscle phosphorylase 
enzyme with resulting inability to convert glycogen into glucose (eg R50X mutation of 
PYGM gene; autosomal recessive). Fatigue & crises of cramps ± hyperthermia. Rhab-
domyolysis/myoglobinuria follow exercise. Tests: CK. Muscle biopsy is diagnostic 
(necrosis and atrophy). : Mod erate aerobic exercise helps (by utilizing alternative 
fuel substrates).51 Avoid heavy exertion and statins. Sucrose pre-exercise improves 
performance, as does a carbohydrate-rich diet. Low-dose creatine and ramipril (only 
if D/D ACE phenotype) may be of minimal beneﬁ t.52  Brian McArdle, 1911–2002 (British paediatrician)
Mallory–Weiss tear Persistent vomiting/retching causes haematemesis via an oe-
sophageal mucosal tear. George K Mallory, 1900–1986 (US pathologist); Soma Weiss, 1898–1942 (US physician)
Marchiafava–Bignami  syndrome  Corpus  callosum  demyelination  and  necrosis, 
most often secondary to chronic alcoholism. Type A is characterized by coma, stu-
por, and pyramidal tract features involving the entire corpus callosum. In type B, 
symptoms are mild and the corpus callosum is partially aff ected.53 : MRI. : As for 
Wernicke’s, p714 (see BOX ‘Adverse eff ects of alcohol on the CNS’). 

Ettore Marchiafava, 1847–1935; Amico Bignami, 1862–1929 (Italian pathologists)
Marchiafava–Micheli syndrome (Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, PNH.) 
An acquired clonal expansion of a multipotent stem cell manifesting with haemolytic 
anaemia (from complement-mediated intravascular haemolysis), large vessel throm-
boses and deﬁ cient haematopoiesis (ranging from mild to pancytopenia). See  BOX, 
‘Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobulinuria’ ﬁ g 15.8, and p338.  

Ettore Marchiafava, 1847–1935 (Italian pathologist); Ferdinando Micheli, 1872–1936 (Italian physician)

_OHCM_10e.indb   704

_OHCM_10e.indb   704

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria: the darkest hour
In paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH), surface proteins are missing in 
all blood cells due to a somatic mutation in the X-linked PIG-A gene. Cells lack the 
glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor that binds the surface proteins to cell 
membranes. This causes uncontrolled ampliﬁ cation of the complement system 
and leads to destruction of the RBC membrane and release of haemoglobin into 
the circulation (ﬁ g 15.8). NB: the phenomenom of haemoglobinuria3 is not all that 
reliable. A much better test even than a marrow biopsy (right-hand panel, show-
ing a clone of PNH cells) is ﬂ ow cytometric analysis of GPI-anchored proteins on 
peripheral blood cells. This can determine the size of the PNH clone and type of GPI 
deﬁ ciency (complete or partial). : Most beneﬁ t from supportive measures—but 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation is the only cure.  Eculizumab is a monoclonal 
antibody that targets the C5 protein of the complement system. Blockade prevents 
activation  of  the  complement  distal  pathway,  reducing  haemolysis,  stabilizing 
haemoglobin, and reducing transfusion requirements.54

705

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.8  Urine and blood in PNH. In this 24h urine sample, the darkest hour is before dawn. 
Haemolysis occurs throughout the day and night, but the urine concentrated overnight pro-
duces the dramatic change in colour.

Courtesy of the Crookston Collection.

Adverse eff  ects of alcohol on the CNS
  • Inhibitions (risk taking; unsafe sex)
  • Wernicke’s encephalopathy
  • Korsakoff ’s syndrome
  • Hepatic encephalopathy
  • Cerebral atrophy (dementia)
  • Central pontine myelinolysis
  • Cerebellar atrophy (eg falls)
  • Stroke (ischaemic and haemorrhagic)
  • Seizures
  • Marchiafava–Bignami syndrome.

3  In haemoglobinuria, urine dipstick will be positive for blood but microscopy of urine does not show RBCS 
(thus diff erentiating it from haematuria, but not myoglobinuria—where CK ± AST will be high).

_OHCM_10e.indb   705

_OHCM_10e.indb   705

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
706

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Marfan’s  syndrome  (table  15.3)  Autosomal  dominant  disorder  (ﬁ brillin-1)  with 
extracellular microﬁ bril formation; but ~25% have no family history. Major crite-
ria: (Diagnostic if >2): lens dislocation (ectopia lentis; ﬁ g 15.9); aortic dissection/
dilat ation; dural ectasia; skeletal  features: arachnodactyly (long spidery ﬁ ngers), 
armspan > height, pectus deformity, scoliosis, pes planus. Minor signs: Mitral valve 
prolapse, high-arched palate, joint hypermobility. Diagnosis is clinical; MRI for dural 
ectasia. : The danger is aortic dissection: -blockers slow dilatation of the aortic 
root. Annual echos, surgical repair when aortic diameter is >5cm. In pregnancy risk 
of dissection. Homocystinuria has similar skeletal deformities.  

Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan, 1858–1942 (French paediatrician)

Table 15.3  Comparing Marfan's and homocystinuria

vs

Marfan’s
Upwards lens dislocation
Aortic valve incompetence
Normal intelligence
Scoliosis, ﬂ at feet, herniae
Life expectancy is lower due
to cardiovascular risks

Homocystinuria
Downwards lens dislocation
Heart rarely aff ected
Mental retardation
Recurrent thromboses, osteoporosis
Positive urine cyanide-nitroprusside test
Response to treatment with pyridoxine

Meckel’s  diverticulum  The  distal  ileum  contains  embryonic  remnants  of  gastric 
and pancreatic tissue. There may be gastric acid secretion, causing GI pain & occult 
bleeding. : Radionucleotide scan; laparotomy.  Johann Friedrich Meckel, 1781–1833 (German anatomist)
Meigs’ syndrome A triad of 1 benign ovarian tumour (ﬁ broma) 2 pleural eff usion 
(R>L) & 3 ascites. It resolves on tumour resection. 
Joe Vincent Meigs, 1892–1963 (US gynaecologist)
Ménétrier’s disease Giant gastric mucosal folds up to 4cm high, in the fundus, with 
atrophy of the glands + mucosal thickness + hypo chlorhydria + protein-losing gastrop-
athy (hence hypoalbuminaemia ± oedema). Causes:  CMV, strep,  H. pylori. There may 
be epigastric pain, vomiting, ± weight. It is pre-malignant. : Treat H. pylori or CMV if 
present; give high-dose PPI; if this fails, consider epidermal growth factor blockade with 
cetuximab or gastrectomy (eg if intractable symptoms or malignant change). Epider-
mal growth factor receptor blockade with cetuximab is 1st–line treatment.55 Surgery if 
intractable symptoms or malignant change. 
Pierre Eugène Ménétrier, 1859–1935 (French pathologist)
Meyer–Betz  syndrome  (Paroxysmal  myoglobinuria.)  Rare  idiopathic  condition 
causing necrosis of exercising muscles. There is muscle pain, weakness, and discol-
oured urine: pinkbrown (as myoglobin is excreted). Acute kidney injury can result 
from  myoglobinuria  (p319).  DIC is  associated.  Tests:  WCC,  LFT,  LDH,  CPK,  urine 
myoglobin. Diagnosis: Muscle biopsy, CPK, and serum myoglobin. Exertion should 
be avoided. 
Friedrich Meyer-Betz, described 1910 (German physician)
Mikulicz’s syndrome Benign persistent swelling of lacrimal and parotid (or sub-
mandibular) glands due to lymphocytic inﬁ ltration. Exclude other causes (sarcoidosis, 
TB, viral infection, lymphoproliferative disorders). It is thought to be an IgG4-related 
plasmacytic systemic disease.56 
Johann Freiherr von Mikulicz-Radecki, 1850–1905 (Polish–Austrian surgeon)
Milroy disease 1° congenital lymphoedema. Mutations in the VEGFR3 gene (dominant) 
cause lymphatic malfunction with lower leg swelling from birth (ﬁ g 15.10). : Lym-
phoscintigraphy; genetic testing. : •Compression hosiery/bandages. •Encourage ex-
ercise. •Good skin hygiene. •Treat cellulitis actively.  William Forsyth Milroy, 1855–1942 (US physician)
Münchausen’s syndrome Vivid liars, who are addicted to institutions, ﬂ it from hos-
p ital to hospital, feigning illness, eg hoping for a laparotomy or mastectomy, or they 
complain of awful bleeding, odd eye movements, curious ﬁ ts, sexual assaults, throat 
closings, false asthma, or heart attacks. Münchausen-by-proxy entails injury to a de-
pendent person by a carer (eg mother) to gain medical attention.   

Karl Friedrich Hieronymus, Freiherr von Münchausen, 1720–1797 (German aristocrat). Described by RAJ Asher in 195157
Ogilvie’s  syndrome  (Acute  colonic  pseudo-obstruction.)  Colonic  obstruction  in 
the absence of a mechanical cause, associated with recent severe illness or surgery. 
: Correct U&E. Colonoscopy allows decomp ression, and excludes mechanical causes. 
Neostigmine is also eff ective, suggesting parasympathetic suppression is to blame.58 
Surgery is rarely needed (eg if perforation). 
William Heneage Ogilvie, 1887–1971 (British surgeon)

_OHCM_10e.indb   706

_OHCM_10e.indb   706

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
707

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig  15.9  Lens  dislocation  in  Marfan’s  synd-
rome:  here  the  lens  is  dislocated  superiorly 
and medially.

Courtesy of Prof Jonathan Trobe.

Fig 15.10  Milroy disease. Lymphoedema may be 
primary, as in Milroy or Meige disease, and is a fea-
ture in both Turner and Noonan syndromes. More 
commonly it is secondary to other conditions, eg 
cancer (after surgery, lymph node dissection, radi-
otherapy, or from direct tumour eff ect), cellulitis, 
varicose veins, or immobility/dependency. Filaria-
sis (p421) is a common cause in tropical regions.

Who was Baron Münchausen?
Baron  Karl  Münchausen  was  an  18th-
century German aristocrat and fabulist, 
whose tall tales became ﬁ rst a popular 
book, then a byword for circular logic, 
and ﬁ nally a medical syndrome of self-
delusion.  He  is  famous  for  riding  can-
nonballs,  travelling  to  the  moon,  and 
pulling  himself  out  of  a  swamp  by  his 
own  hair.  In  emergencies  (we’ve  all 
had that sinking feeling…), this method 
may save your life, for example in your 
ﬁ nal exams (ﬁ g 15.11):
Examiner: ‘What is ITP?’
You:  ‘ITP  is  idiopathic  thrombocyto-
penic  purpura.’  (you  have  scored  50% 
already).
Examiner:  ‘And  what  is  idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura?’
You: ‘It’s when a cryptogenic cause of a low platelet count leads to purpura.’
You have deployed your skills with logical brilliance, without adding a single in-
sight. For this Münchausen circularity you may be awarded 100%—unless your 
examiner is a philosopher, when the right answer would be ‘What is ITP? I don’t 
know—and nor do you’—but don’t try this too often. You see, you must never for-
get that medicine is marvellously scientiﬁ c, and no one is popular who dares cast 
doubt on this article of faith.

Fig 15.11  Münchausen during his ﬁ nals.

_OHCM_10e.indb   707

_OHCM_10e.indb   707

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
708

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Ortner’s cardiovocal syndrome Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy from a large left 
atrium (eg from mitral stenosis) or aortic dissection. Norbert Ortner, 1865–1935 (Austrian physician)
Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome (Hereditary telangiectasia.) Autosomal dominant 
telangiec tasia of skin & mucous membranes (causing epistaxis and GI bleeds), see ﬁ g 
15.12. Associated with pulmonary, hepatic, and cerebral arteriovenous malformations.
 William Osler, 1849–1919 (Canadian); Frederick Weber, 1863–1962 (British); Henri Rendu, 1844–1902 (French)—physicians
Paget’s disease of the breast (PDB) Intra-epidermal spread of an intraduct cancer, 
which can look just like eczema. Any red, scaly lesion at the nipple (see ﬁ g 15.13) 
must suggest PDB: do a biopsy. : Breast-conserving surgery + radiotherapy. Sentinel 
node biopsy should be performed. 
Sir James Paget, 1814–1899 (British surgeon)
Pancoast’s syndrome Apical lung ca invades the sympathetic plexus in the neck 
(ipsi lateral Horner’s, p702) ± brachial plexus (arm pain ± weakness) ± recurrent 
laryngeal nerve (hoarse voice/bovine cough). 
Henry Pancoast, 1875–1939 (US radiologist)
Parinaud’s syndrome (Dorsal midbrain syndrome.) Upward gaze palsy + pseudo-
Argyll Robertson pupils (p72) ± bilateral papilloedema. Causes: Pineal or midbrain 
tumours; upper brainstem stroke; MS.  
Henry Parinaud, 1844–1905 (French neuro-ophthalmologist)
Peutz–Jeghers’  syndrome  Dominant  germline  mutations  of  tumour  suppressor 
gene STK11 (in 66–94%) cause mucocutaneous dark freckles on lips (ﬁ g 15.14), oral 
mucosa, palms and soles, + multiple GI polyps (hamartomas), causing obstruction, 
intussusception, or bleeds. There is a 15-fold risk of developing GI cancer perform 
colonoscopy (from age 18yrs) and OGD (from age 25yrs) every 3yrs. NB: hamartomas 
are excessive focal overgrowths of normal cells in an organ composed of the same 
cell type.  
Johannes LA Peutz, 1886–1957 (Dutch physician); Harold J Jeghers, 1904–1990 (US physician)
Peyronie’s disease (Penile angulation.) Pathogenesis: A poorly understood connec-
tive  tissue  disorder  most  commonly  attributed  to  repetitive  microvascular  trauma 
during sexual intercourse, resulting in penile curvature and painful ere ct ile dysfunc-
tion (in 50%; p230). Preval ence: 3–9%. Typical age: >40yrs. Associations: Dupuytren’s 
(p698); atheroma; radical prost atectomy.  : Haemangioma. Tests: Ultrasound/MRI. 
: Oral potassium para-aminobenzoate (Potaba®), intralesional verapamil, clostridial 
collagenase,  or  interferon  2B;  topical  verapamil  15%  gel;  iontophoresis  with  vera-
pamil and dexamethasone. All have various success.59 Surgery: (If disease stable for >3 
months) tunica plication ± penile prostheses. Manage associated depression (seen in 
48%). Penile rehabilitation can help (p230).60 
Francois Gigot de la Peyronie, 1678–1747 (French surgeon)
Pott’s syndrome (Spinal TB.) Rare in the West, this is usually from an extra-spinal 
source, eg lungs. Features: Backache, and stiff ness of all back movements. Fever, 
night sweats, and weight loss occur. Progressive bone destruction leads to vertebral 
collapse and gibbus (sharply angled spinal curvature). Abscess formation may lead 
to cord compression, causing paraplegia, and bowel/bladder dysfunction (p466). X-
rays: (ﬁ g 15.15) Narrow disc spaces and vertebral osteoporosis, leading to destruc-
tion with wedging of vertebrae. Lesions in the thoracic spine often lead to kyphosis. 
Abscess formation in the lumbar spine may track down to the psoas muscle, and 
erode through the skin. : Anti-TB drugs (p394). 
Sir Percival Pott, 1714–1788 (British surgeon)
Prinzmetal (variant) angin a Angina from coronary artery spasm, which may lead 
to MI, ventricular arrhythmias or sudden death. Severe chest pain occurs without 
physical exertion. Triggers include hyperventilation, cocaine and tobacco use. ECG: ST 
elevation. : Establish the diagnosis. GTN treats angina. Use Ca2+-channel blockers 
(p114) and long-acting nitrates as prophylaxis.  
Myron Prinzmetal, 1908–1987 (US cardiologist)
Raynaud’s syndrome This is peripheral digital ischaemia due to paroxysmal va-
sospasm, precipitated by cold or emotion. Fingers or toes ache and change colour: 
pale  (ischaemia)  blue  (deoxygenation)  red  (reactive  hyperaemia).  It  may  be 
idiopathic (Raynaud’s disease—prevalence: 3–20%; : >1:1) or have an underlying 
cause (Raynaud’s phenomenon; ﬁ g 15.16). Tests: Exclude an underlying cause (see BOX 
‘Conditions in which Raynaud’s phenomenon may be exhibited’). : Keep warm (eg 
hand warmers); stop smoking.4 Nifedipine 5–20mg/8h PO helps, as may evening prim-
rose oil, sildenaﬁ l, and epoprostenol (for severe attacks/digital gangrene). Relapse is 
common. Chemical or surgical (lumbar or digital) sympathectomy may help in those 
with severe disease. 
AG Maurice Raynaud, 1834–1881 (French physician)

_OHCM_10e.indb   708

_OHCM_10e.indb   708

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
Prinzmetal angina and vascular hyperreactivity
Coronary spasm causes Prinzmetal angina and also contributes to coronary heart 
disease in general, eg acute coronary syndrome (esp. in Japan).  Coronary spasm 
can be induced by ergonovine, acetylcholine, and methacholine (the former is used 
diagnostically).5  These  cause  vasodilation  by  endothelium-derived  nitric  oxide 
when vascular endothelium is functioning normally, whereas they cause vasocon-
striction if the endothelium is damaged. In the light of these facts, patients with 
coronary spasm are thought to have a disturbance in endothelial function as well 
as local hyperreactivity of the coronary arteries.

If full anti-anginal therapy does not reduce symptoms, stenting  or intra coronary 
radiation (20Gy brachytherapy) to vasospastic segments may be tried.  Prognosis 
is good (especially if non-smoker, no past MI, and no diabetes; progress to infarc-
tion is quite rare);61 -blockers and large doses of aspirin are contraindicated.

Prinzmetal angina is associated with vascular hyperreactivity/vasospastic dis-
orders such as Raynaud’s phenomenon and migraine. It is also associated with 
circle of Willis occlusion from intimal thickening (moyamoya disease). 

709

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig  15.13  Paget’s  disease  of 
the breast.

Fig 
15.12  Telangiectasia 
in 
Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome.
Reproduced from Cox and 
Roper, Clinical Skills, 2005, 
with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig  15.14  Perioral  pigmenta-
tion,  seen  in  Peutz–Jeghers’ 
syndrome.

Reproduced from Cox and 
Roper, Clinical Skills, 2005, 
with permission from Oxford 
University Press.

Fig 15.15  TB of axis: soft tis-
sue  swelling  displaces  the 
air–tissue 
retro pharyngeal 
boun dary  forwards.  There  is 
an anterior defect in the ver-
tebra, below the axis peg.

Courtesy of Dr Ian Maddison, 
myweb.lsbu.ac.uk.

Conditions in which Raynaud’s phenomenon may be exhibited
Connective tissue disorders: Syst emic 
sclerosis, SLE, rheumatoid arth ritis, der-
matomyositis/polymyositis.
Occupational: Using vibrating tools.
Obstructive:  Thoracic  outlet  obst-
ruction, Buerger’s disease, atheroma.
Blood: Thrombocytosis, cold agg lutinin 
disease,  polycyth aemia  rubra  vera 
(p366), mono clonal gammopathies.
Drugs: -blockers.
Others: Hypothyroidism.

Fig 15.16  Raynaud’s phenomenon in SLE.

Courtesy of the Crookston Collection.

4  Patient information on Raynaud’s is available from www.raynauds.org.uk. 
5  Since Prinzmetal angina is not a ‘demand-induced’ symptom, but a supply (vasospastic) abnormality, 
exercise tolerance tests don’t help. The most sensitive and speciﬁ c test is IV ergonovine; 50mcg at 5min 
intervals in a specialist lab until a +ve result or 400mcg is given. When positive, the symptoms and ST should 
be present. Nitroglycerin rapidly reverses the eff ects of ergonovine if refractory spasm occurs.62

_OHCM_10e.indb   709

_OHCM_10e.indb   709

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
710

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Refsum disease Phytanic acid accumulates in tissues and serum, due to PHYH or PEX7 
gene mutation (recessive). This leads to anosmia (a universal ﬁ nding) and early-onset 
retinitis  pigmentosa,  with  variable  combinations  of  neuropathy,  deafness,  ataxia, 
ichthyosis,  and  cardiomyopathy.  Tests:  Plasma  phytanic  acid.  :  Restrict  foods 
containing phytanic acid (animal fats, dairy products, green leafy vegetables); plas-
mapheresis is used for severe symptoms.63  Sigvald Bernhard Refsum, 1907–1991 (Norwegian physician)
Romano–Ward syndrome A dominant mutation in a K+ channel subunit causes long 
QT syndrome ± episodic VT, VF, torsades, ± sudden death. (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen 
syn is similar, p702.)   Cesarino Romano, 1924–2008 (Italian paediatrician); Owen C Ward, b1923 (Irish paediatrician)
Rotor syndrome A rare, benign, autosomal recessive disorder. Primary non-haemo-
lytic  conjugated  hyperbilirubinaemia,  with  almost  normal  hepatic  histology  (no 
pigmentation, in contrast to DJS, p698). Typically presents in childhood with mild jaun-
dice. Cholescintigraphy reveals an ‘absent’ liver.  Arturo Belleza Rotor, 1907–1988 (Filipino physician)
Sister Mary Joseph nodule An umbilical metastatic nodule from an intra-abdominal 
malignancy (ﬁ g 15.17). Sister Mary Joseph Dempsey, 1856–1939 (US catholic nun & Dr William Mayo’s surgical assistant)
Sjögren’s syndrome A chronic inﬂ ammatory autoimmune disorder, which may be 
primary  (:≈9:1,  onset  4th–5th  decade)  or  secondary,  associated  with  connec-
tive tissue disease (eg RA, SLE, systemic sclerosis). There is lymphocytic inﬁ ltration 
and ﬁ brosis of exocrine glands, especially lacrimal and salivary glands. Features: 
Tear production (dry eyes, keratoconjunctivitis sicca), salivation (xerostomia—dry 
mouth, caries), parotid swelling. Other glands are aff ected causing vaginal dryness, 
dyspareunia, dry cough, and dysphagia. Systemic signs include polyarthritis/arthral-
gia, Raynaud’s, lymphadenopathy, vasculitis, lung, liver, and kidney involvement, pe-
ripheral neuropathy, myositis, and fatigue. It is associated with other autoimmune 
diseases (eg thyroid disease, autoimmune hepatitis, PBC) and an risk of non-Hodg-
kin’s B-cell lymphoma. Tests: Schirmer’s test measures conjunctival dryness (<5mm 
in 5min is +ve). Rose Bengal staining may show keratitis (use a slit-lamp). Anti-Ro 
(SSA; in 40%) & anti-La (SSB; in 26%) antibodies may be present (in pregnancy, these 
cross the placenta and cause fetal congenital heart block in 5%). ANA is usually +ve 
(74%); rheumatoid factor is +ve in 38%. There may be hypergammaglob ulinaemia. 
Biopsy shows focal lymphocytic aggregation. : Treat sicca symptoms: eg hypro mel-
lose (artiﬁ cial tears), frequent drinks, sugar-free pastilles/gum. NSAIDS and hydroxy-
chloroquine are used for arthralgia. Immunosuppressants may be indicated in severe 
systemic disease.64 
Henrik Conrad Samuel Sjögren, 1899–1986 (Swedish ophthalmologist)
Stevens–Johnson syndrome A severe form of erythema multiforme (p562), and a 
variant of toxic epidermal necrolysis. It is caused by a hypersensitivity reaction, usu-
ally to drugs (eg salicylates, sulfonamides, penicillin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin), but is also seen with infections or cancer. There is ulceration of the skin 
and mucosal surfaces  (see  ﬁ g  15.18). Typical target lesions develop, often on the 
palms or soles with blistering in the centre. There may be a prodromal phase with fe-
ver, malaise, arthralgia, myalgia ± vomiting and diarrhoea. : Mild disease is usually 
self-limiting—remove any precipitant and give supportive care (eg calamine lotion 
for the skin). Steroid use is controversial—trials have been variable, so ask a derma-
tologist and ophthalmologist. IV immunoglobulin has shown beneﬁ t. Plasmapheresis 
and immunosuppressive agents may have a role.65 Prognosis: Mortality ~5%. May be 
severe for the ﬁ rst 10d before resolving over 30d. Damage to the eyes may persist 
and blindness can result. 
Albert M Stevens 1884–1945; Frank C Johnson, 1894–1934 (US paediatricians)
Sturge–Weber  syndrome  (SWS)  Essential  features:  1  Facial  cutaneous  capillary 
malformation (port wine stain;  PWS) in the ophthalmic dermatome (V1 ± V2/V3). 
2 Clinical signs or radiologic evidence of a leptomeningeal vascular malformation. 
75% of patients with unilateral involvement develop seizures by age 1yr (95% if bilat-
eral)—due (in part) to the increased metabolic demand of a developing brain in the 
setting of vascular compromise. Early management of seizures is critical to minimize 
brain  injury.  Some  patients  have  severe  cognitive  and  neurologic  deﬁ cits  beyond 
simple seizure activity. Screen early for glaucoma (50%). EEG and MRI help establish 
early diagnosis and treatment in patients at risk for SWS. Treat the PWS early with 
pulsed dye laser.  
William A Sturge, 1850–1919; Frederick P Weber, 1863–1962 (British physicians)

_OHCM_10e.indb   710

_OHCM_10e.indb   710

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
Causes of a long QT interval
Many conditions and drugs (check  BNF) cause a long  QT interval. Brugada syn-
drome (p695) is similar, predisposing to sudden cardiac death.
Congenital: Romano–Ward syndrome (autosomal dominant). Jervell and Lange-
Nielsen syndrome (autosomal recessive) with associated deafness (p702). 
Cardiac: Myocardial infarction or ischaemia; mitral valve prolapse.
HIV: May be a direct eff ect of the virus or from protease inhibitors.
Metabolic: K+; Mg2+; Ca2+; starvation; hypothyroidism; hypothermia.
Toxic: Organophosphates.
Anti-arrhythmic drugs: Quinidine; amiodarone; procainamide; sotalol.
Antimicrobials: Erythromycin; levoﬂ oxacin; pentamidine; halofantrine.
Antihistamines: Terfenadine; astemizole.
Motility drugs: Domperidone.
Psychoactive drugs: Haloperidol; risperidone; tricyclics; SSRIs.
Connective tissue diseases: Anti-Ro/SSA antibodies (p552).
Herbalism: Ask about Chinese folk remedies (may contain unknown amounts of 
arsenic).  Cocaine, quinine, and artemisinins (and other antimalarials) are exam-
ples of herbalism-derived products that can prolong the QT interval.

711

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.17  Sister Mary Joseph nodule.
Reproduced from Postgraduate Medical Journal, 
'Sister Joseph nodule', J E Clague, 78(917), 174, 2002 
with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

Fig 15.18  Stevens–Johnson syndrome. 
Reproduced from Emberger et al, Stevens–Johnson 
syndrome associated with anti-malarial prophy-
laxis. Clinical Infectious Diseases (2003) 37:1, with 
permission from Oxford University Press. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   711

_OHCM_10e.indb   711

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
712

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Takayasu’s arteritis (Aortic arch syndrome; pulseless disease.) Rare outside of 
Japan, this systemic vasculitis aff ects the aorta and its major branches. Granuloma-
tous inﬂ ammation causes stenosis, thrombosis, and aneurysms. It often aff ects wom-
en aged 20–40yrs. Symptoms depend on the arteries involved. The aortic arch is often 
aff ected, with cerebral, ophthalmological, and upper limb symptoms, eg dizziness, 
visual changes, weak arm pulses. Systemic features are common—eg fever, weight 
loss, and malaise. BP is often a feature, due to renal artery stenosis. Complications 
include aortic valve regurgitation, aortic aneurysm and dissection; ischaemic stroke 
(BP and thrombus); and ischaemic heart disease. Diagnosis: ESR and CRP;  MRI/PET 
allows earlier diagnosis than standard angiography. : Prednisolone (1mg/kg/d PO). 
Methotrexate or cyclophosphamide have been used in resistant cases. BP control is 
essential to risk of stroke. Angioplasty ± stenting, or bypass surgery is performed for 
critical stenosis. Prognosis: ~95% survival at 15 years. 

Mikito Takayasu, 1860–1938 (Japanese ophthalmologist)
Tietze’s syndrome (Idiopathic costochondritis.) Localized pain/tenderness at the 
costosternal junction, enhanced by motion, coughing, or sneezing. The 2nd rib is most 
often aff ected. The diagnostic key is localized tenderness which is marked (ﬂ inches 
on prodding). Treatment: Simple analgesia, eg NSAIDS. Its importance is that it is a 
benign cause of what at ﬁ rst seems to be alarming, eg cardiac pain. In lengthy ill-
ness, local steroid injections may be used.  
Alexander Tietze, 1864–1927 (German surgeon)
Todd’s palsy Transient neurological deﬁ cit (paresis) after a seizure. There may be 
face, arm, or leg weakness, aphasia, or gaze palsy, lasting from ~30min–36h. The 
aetiology is unclear. 
Robert Bentley Todd, 1809–1860 (Irish-born physician)
Vincent’s angina (Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.) Mouth infection with ulcera-
tive gingivitis from Borrelia vincentii (a spirochaete) + fusiform bacilli, often aff ecting 
young  smokers with poor oral hygiene. Try amoxicillin 500mg/8h and metronida-
zole 400mg/8h PO, + chlorhex idine mouthwash.  Jean Hyacinthe Vincent, 1862–1950 (French physician)
Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome A dominant germline mutation of a tumour sup-
pressor gene. It predisposes to bilateral renal cysts and clear cell renal carcinoma 
(p320), retinal & cerebellar haemangioblastoma, and phaeochromocytoma. See ﬁ gs 
15.19, 15.20. It may present with visual impairment or cerebellar signs (eg unilateral 
ataxia). 
Eugen von Hippel, 1867–1939 (German ophthalmologist); Arvid Lindau, 1892–1958 (Swedish pathologist)
Von Willebrand’s disease (VWD) Von Willebrand’s factor (vWF) has three roles in 
clotting: 1 To bring platelets into contact with exposed subendothelium. 2 To make 
platelets bind to each other. 3 To bind to factor VIII, protecting it from destruction in 
the circulation. There are >22 types of vWD; the commonest are:
Type I: (60–80%) Levels of of vWF. Symptoms are mild. Autosomal dominant.
Type II: (20–30%) Abnormal vWF, with lack of high-molecular-weight multimers. Usu-
ally autosomal dominant inheritance. Bleeding tendency varies. There are 4 subtypes.
Type III: (1–5%) Undetectable vWF levels (autosomal recessive with gene deletions). 
vWF antigen is lacking and there is factor VIII. Symptoms can be severe.
Signs  are  of  a  platelet-type  disorder  (p344):  bruising,  epistaxis,  menorrhagia, 
bleeding post-tooth extraction. Tests: APTT, bleeding time, factor VIIIC (clotting 
activity), vWF Ag; INR and platelets. : Get expert help. Desmopressin is used in 
mild bleeding, vWF-containing factor VIII concentrate for surgery or major bleeds. 
Avoid NSAIDS. 
Erik Adolf von Willebrand, 1870–1949 (Finnish physician)
Wallenberg’s  lateral  medullary  syndrome  This  relatively  common  syndrome 
comprises lesions to multiple CNS nuclei, caused by posterior or inferior cerebellar 
artery occlusion leading to brainstem infarction (ﬁ g 15.21). Features: • Dysphagia, 
dys arthria (IX and X nuclei). • Vertigo, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus (vestibular nu-
cleus). • Ipsilateral ataxia (inferior cerebellar peduncle). • Ipsilateral Horner’s syn-
drome (descending sympathetic ﬁ bres). • Loss of pain and temperature sensation on 
the ipsilateral face (V nucleus) and contralateral limbs (spinothalamic tract). There is 
no limb weakness as the pyramidal tracts are unaff ected.

In  the  rarer  medial  medullary  syndrome,  vertebral  or  anterior  spinal  artery 
occlusion causes ipsilateral tongue paralysis (XII nucleus) with contralateral limb 
weakness (pyramidal tract, sparing the face) and loss of position sense.  

Adolf Wallenberg, 1862–1949 (German neurologist)

_OHCM_10e.indb   712

_OHCM_10e.indb   712

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
713

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.19  Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome show-
ing retinal detachment.
Reproduced with permission from the National Eye 
Institute, National Institutes of Health.

Fig 15.20  Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome show-
ing a retinal tumour.
Reproduced with permission from the National Eye 
Institute, National Institutes of Health.

XII nucleus

Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus

Structures involved
in PICA thrombosis

Medial lemniscus

Pyramidal tract

X nucleus
Nucleus solitarius

Vestibular nucleus

V nucleus and
tract
Spinocerebellar
tract
Spinothalamic tract

Fig 15.21  Cross section of the medulla showing structures involved in Wallenberg’s lateral medul-
lary syndrome (posterior inferior cerebellar artery thrombosis).

_OHCM_10e.indb   713

_OHCM_10e.indb   713

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
714

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Waterhouse–Friderichsen’s  (WhF)  syndrome  Bilateral  adrenal  cortex  haemor-
rhage,  often  occurring  in  rapidly  deteriorating  meningococcal  sepsis,  alongside 
widespread  purpura,  meningitis,  coma,  and  DIC  (ﬁ g  15.22).  The  meningococcal  en-
dotoxin acts as a potent initiator of inﬂ ammatory and coagulation cascades. Other 
causes include H. inﬂ uenzae, pneumococcal, streptococcal, and staphylococcal sep-
sis.  Adrenal  failure  causes  shock,  as  normal  vascular  tone  requires  cortisol  to  set 
activity  of  -  and  -adrenergic  receptors,  and  aldosterone  is  needed  to  maintain 
extracellular ﬂ uid volume. Treatment:  Antibiotics, eg ceftriaxone (p822) and hy-
drocortisone 200mg/4h IV for adrenal support. ICU admission. 

Rupert Waterhouse, 1873–1958 (British physician); Carl Friderichsen, 1886–1979 (Danish paediatrician)
Weber’s  syndrome  (Superior  alternating  hemiplegia.)  Ipsilateral  oculomotor 
nerve palsy with contralateral hemiplegia, due to infarction of one-half of the mid-
brain, after occlusion of the paramedian branches of the basilar or posterior cerebral 
arteries. 
Herman David Weber, 1823–1918 (German-born physician whose son described Sturge–Weber syndrome)
Wegener’s granulomatosis This has been renamed granulomatosis  with  poly-
angiitis (GPA), in part because of concerns over the suitability of Friedrich Wegener, 
a member of the Nazi party during WWII, to be the source of an eponym. GPA is a mul-
tisystem disorder of unknown cause character ized by necrotizing granulomatous 
inﬂ ammation and vasculitis of small and medium vessels. It has a predilection for 
the upper respiratory tract, lungs, and kidneys. Features: Upper airways disease is 
common, with nasal obstruction, ulcers, epistaxis, or destruction of the nasal septum 
causing  a  characteristic  ‘saddle-nose’  deformity.6  Sinusitis  is  often  a  feature.  Re-
nal disease causes rapidly progressive glom erulo nephritis with crescent formation, 
proteinuria, or haematuria. Pulmonary involvement may cause cough, haemoptysis 
(severe if pulmonary haemorrhage), or pleuritis. There may also be skin purpura or 
nodules, peripheral neuropathy, mononeuritis multiplex, arthritis/arthralgia, or ocu-
lar involvement, eg keratitis, conjunctivitis, scleritis, episcleritis, uveitis. Tests: CANCA 
directed against PR3 is most speciﬁ c and raised in the majority of patients (p553). 
Some patients express  PANCA speciﬁ c for  MPO. ESR/CRP. Urinalysis should be per-
formed to look for proteinuria or haematuria. If these are present, consider a renal 
biopsy. CXR may show nodules ± ﬂ uff y inﬁ ltrates of pulmonary haemorrhage. CT may 
reveal  diff use  alveolar  haemorrhage.  Atypical  cells  from  cytology  of  sputum/BAL 
can be confused with bronchial carcinoma.66 Treatment: Depends on the extent of 
disease. Severe disease (eg biopsy-proven renal disease) should be treated with cor-
ticosteroids and cyclophosphamide (or rituximab) to induce remission. Azathioprine 
and methotrexate are usually used as maintenance. Indications for plasma exchange 
include patients presenting with severe renal disease (eg creatinine >500μmol/L) and 
those with pulmonary haemorrhage. Co-trimoxazole should be given as prophylaxis 
against Pneumocystis jirovecii and staphylococcal colonization.

Friedrich Wegener, 1907–1990 (German pathologist)
Wernicke’s  encephalopathy  Thiamine  (vitamin  B1)  deﬁ ciency  with  a  classical 
triad of 1 confusion 2 ataxia and 3 ophthalmoplegia (nystagmus, lateral rectus, or 
conjugate  gaze  palsies).  There  is  inadequate  dietary  intake,  GI  absorption,  and 
impaired utilization of thiamine resulting in focal areas of brain damage, including 
periaqueductal punctate haemorrhages (mechanism unclear). Always consider this 
diagnosis in alcoholics: it may also present with memory disturbance, hypotension, 
hypothermia,  or  reduced  consciousness.67  Recognized  causes:  Chronic  alcoholism, 
eating disorders, malnutrition, prolonged vomiting, eg with chemotherapy, GI malig-
nancy, or hyperemesis gravidarum. Diagnosis: Primarily clinical. Red cell transketo-
lase activity is decreased (rarely done). Treatment: Urgent replacement to prevent 
irreversible Korsakoff ’s syndrome (p704). Give thiamine (Pabrinex®), 2 pairs of high-
potency ampoules IV/IM/8h over 30min for 2d, then 1 pair OD for a further 5d. Oral 
supplementation (100mg OD) should continue until no longer ‘at risk’ (+ give other B 
vitamins). Anaphylaxis is rare. If there is coexisting hypoglycaemia (often the case in 
this group of patients), make sure thiamine is given before glucose, as Wernicke’s can 
be precipitated by glucose administration to a thiamine-deﬁ cient patient. Prognosis: 
Untreated, death occurs in 20%, and Korsakoff ’s psychosis occurs in 85%—a quarter 
of whom will require long-term institutional care.  Karl Wernicke, 1848–1905 (German neurologist)

_OHCM_10e.indb   714

_OHCM_10e.indb   714

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
 
715

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.22  Meningococcal sepsis with purpura.

6  Common  causes  of  a  ‘saddle-nose’  deformity  are  trauma  and  iatrogenic  (eg  post-rhinoplasty).  Rarer 
causes (popular with some ﬁ nals examiners): GPA, relapsing polychondritis, syphilis, and leprosy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   715

_OHCM_10e.indb   715

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
716

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Whipple’s disease A rare disease68 featuring GI malabsorption which usually occurs 
in middle-aged white males, most commonly in Europe. It is fatal if untreated and is 
caused by Tropheryma whippelii, which, combined with defective cell-mediated im-
munity, produces a systemic disease. Features: Often starts insidiously with arthral-
gia (chronic, migratory, seronegative arthropathy aff ecting mainly peripheral joints). 
GI symptoms commonly include colicky abdominal pain, weight loss, steatorrhea/
diarrhoea, which leads to malabsorption (p266). Systemic symptoms such as chronic 
cough, fever, sweats, lymphadenopathy, and skin hyperpigmentation also occur. Car-
diac involvement may lead to endocarditis, which is typically blood culture negative. 
CNS features include a reversible dementia, ophthalmoplegia, and facial myoclonus (if 
all together, they are highly suggestive)—also hypothalamic syndrome (hyperphagia, 
polydipsia, insomnia). NB: CNS involvement may occur without GI involvement. Tests: 
Diagnosis requires a high level of clinical suspicion. Jejunal biopsy shows stunted 
villi. There is deposition of macrophages in the lamina propria-containing granules 
which stain positive for periodic acid–Schiff  (PAS). Similar cells may be found in af-
fected samples, eg CSF, cardiac valve tissue, lymph nodes, synovial ﬂ uid. The bacteria 
may be seen within macrophages on electron microscopy. PCR of bacterial RNA can 
be performed on serum or tissue. MRI may demonstrate CNS involvement. : Should 
include antibiotics which cross the blood–brain barrier. Current recommendations: 
IV ceftriaxone (or penicillin+streptomycin) for 2wks then oral co-trimoxazole for 1 
year. Shorter courses risk relapse. A rapid improvement in symptoms usually occurs.
George Hoyt Whipple, 1878–1976 (US pathologist)
Zellweger syndrome (Cerebrohepatorenal syndrome.) A rare recessive disorder 
characterized by absent peroxisomes (intracellular organelles required for many cel-
lular activities including lipid metabolism). The syndrome has a similar molecular ba-
sis to infantile Refsum’s syndrome, and although more severe, exhibits comparable 
biochemical abnormalities (p710). Clinical features include craniofacial abnormali-
ties, severe hypotonia and mental retardation, glaucoma, cataracts, hepatomegaly, 
and renal cysts. A number of causative PEX gene mutations have been identiﬁ ed. Life 
expectancy is usually a few months only.  
Hans Zellweger, 1909–1990 (US paediatrician)
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome This is the association of peptic ulcers with a gastrin-
secreting adenoma (gastrinoma). Gastrin excites excessive gastric acid production, 
which may produce multiple ulcers in the duodenum and stomach. The adenoma is 
usually found in the pancreas, although it may arise in the stomach or duodenum. 
Most cases are sporadic; 20% are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 
1 (MEN1, p223). 60% are malignant; metastases are found in local lymph nodes and 
the liver. Symptoms: Include abdominal pain and dyspepsia, from the ulcer(s), and 
chronic diarrhoea due to inactivation of pancreatic enzymes (also causes steator-
rhoea) and damage to intestinal mucosa. Incidence: ~0.1% of patients with peptic 
ulcer disease. Suspect in those with multiple peptic ulcers, ulcers distal to the duo-
denum, or a family history of peptic ulcers (or of islet cell, pituitary, or parathyroid 
adenomas). Tests: (ﬁ g 15.23) Fasting serum gastrin level (>1000pg/mL). Measure 
three fasting levels on diff erent days. Hypo chlorhydria (reduced acid production, eg 
in chronic atrophic gastritis) should be excluded as this also causes a raised gastrin 
level: gastric pH should be <2. The secretin stimulation test is useful in suspected 
cases with only mildly raised gastrin levels (100–1000pg/mL). The adenoma is often 
small and diffi  cult to image; a combination of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, 
endoscopic ultrasound, and CT is used to localize and stage the adenoma. OGD evalu-
ates gastric/duodenal ulceration. : High-dose proton pump inhibitors, eg omepra-
zole: start with 60mg/d and adjust according to response. Measuring intragastric pH 
helps determine the best dose (aim to keep pH at 2–7). All gastrinomas have malig-
nant potential—and surgery is better sooner than later (with lymph node clearance 
generally recommended if >2cm in size). Surgery may be avoided in MEN1, as adeno-
mas are often multiple, and metastatic disease is rare. If well-diff erentiated (G1 and 
G2) somatostatin analogues may be 1st-line and chemotherapy with streptozotocin 
(if available) + doxorubicin/5-FU is 2nd-line. In G3, etoposide + cisplatin is possible.69 
Selective embolization may be done for hepatic metastases. Prognosis: 5yr survival: 
80% if single resectable lesion, ~20% with hepatic metastases. Screen all patients 
for MEN1.  
Robert M Zollinger, 1903–1992; Edwin H Ellison, 1918–1970 (US surgeons)

_OHCM_10e.indb   716

_OHCM_10e.indb   716

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
717

s
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s
s
u
o
m
y
n
o
p
E

Fig 15.23  OctreoScan in patient with metastatic MEN 1 gastrinoma. Solitary hepatic metastatic 
deposit (thin arrow), gastric neuroendocrine tumour (thick arrow).

Reproduced from Wass et al., Oxford Textbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 2011, with permission 
from Oxford University Press.

Epilogue
25% of patients with rare diseases have to wait from 5–30 years for a diagnosis. 
40% are misdiagnosed resulting in inappropriate drugs or psychological treat-
ments—eg  20%  of  people  with  Ehlers–Danlos  syndrome  (p149)  had  to  consult 
over 20 doctors before the diagnosis was made,70 causing understandable loss of 
conﬁ dence in our profession. Lack of appropriate referral and rejection because 
of disease complexity are common problems. Let us cultivate our networks with 
each other and approach ‘unexplained symptoms’ with an open mind.

_OHCM_10e.indb   717

_OHCM_10e.indb   717

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
16  Radiology

Contents
Principles in radiology:
Typical eff ective doses  719
Justifying exposure to ionizing 

radiation  719

The art of the request  720
Interpreting an image  721
Presenting an image  721

Modalities:
Chest X-ray (CXR)  722–7
Plain abdominal X-ray  728
Computed tomography (CT)  730–3
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  734
Ultrasound (US) 736
Nuclear medicine  738

Radiology in clinical practice:
(NB: thoracic imaging is covered in 

modalities, p726, p730)
Cardiovascular imaging  740
Gastrointestinal imaging  742
Genitourinary imaging  744
Neuroimaging  746
Contrast media in imaging  748
Imaging the acutely unwell 

patient  749

Fig 16.1  The ﬁ rst X-ray, taken by Wilhelm Rönt-
gen of his wife’s hand (for which he won the ﬁ rst 
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901). Upon seeing the 
ghostly image she cried ‘I have seen my death!’ 
Could this exclamation have prophesized the ra-
diation-induced malignancies that have plagued 
the  recipients  (and  administrators)  of  X-rays 
since  their  conception  (see  BOX)?  Despite  the 
obvious commercial potential, Röntgen declined 
to take out any patents on his new technology, 
preferring to see it developed for the beneﬁ t of 
humanity. Fate did not repay this generosity: his 
personal wealth depreciated away in the German 
hyperinﬂ ation of the 1920s, and he spent his later 
years in bankruptcy. 

Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution 
only licence CC BY 4.0 from Wellcome Library, 
London, https://blog.wellcome.ac.uk/2010/08/13/wellcome-
image-of-the-month-the-left-hand-of-anna-roentgen

We  thank  Professor  Peter  Scally,  Dr  Dean  McCoombe,  and  Dr  Paul  Thomas,  our  Specialist  Readers 
for this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   718

_OHCM_10e.indb   718

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

719

Typical eff  ective doses
The eff ective dose of an examination is calculated as the weighted sum of the 
doses to diff erent body tissues. The weighting factor for each tissue depends on 
its sensitivity. The eff ective dose thus provides a single dose estimate related to 
the total radiation risk, no matter how the radiation dose is distributed around the 
body. This table is certainly not to be learnt; rather it serves as a reminder of the 
relative exposures to radiation that we prescribe in practice. Remember that US 
and MRI involve no radiation, would they provide the answer?
Table 16.1  Radiation doses in common radiological investigations

Procedure

Typical eff  ective 
dose (mSv)

CXR equivalents

Approx. equivalent period 
of background radiation

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

X-ray examinations
Limbs and joints
Chest (PA)
Abdomen
Lumbar spine
CT head
CT chest
CT abdo/pelvis
Radionuclide studies
Lung ventilation
Lung perfusion
Bone
PET head

PET-CT

<0.01
0.015
0.4
0.6
1.4
6.6
6.7

0.4
1
3
7
18

<1
1
30
40
90
440
450

30
70
200
460
1200

<2 days
2.5 days
2 months
3 months
7.5 months
3 years
3 years

9 weeks
6 months
1.4 years
3.2 years
8.1 years

Reproduced from iRefer Making the Best Use of Clinical Radiology, 7th edition,
©Royal College of Radiologists, 2012.

Justifying exposure to ionizing radiation
The very nature of ionizing radiation that gives us vision into the human body also 
gives it lethal properties. In considering the decision to expose patients to radia-
tion, the clinical beneﬁ ts should outweigh the risks of genetic mutation and cancer 
induction. These risks can be hard to quantify (and estimates vary wildly—extrapo-
lation of eff ects from doses associated with nuclear explosions are likely unreli-
able) but even with strict guidelines we still have a tendency to over-exposure in 
medical practice. Perhaps the best advice is to be certain of the importance of 
every dose of radiation that you sanction, and mindful of the comparative doses 
involved (see table 16.1).

The responsibility lies with us not to rely too heavily on radiology. Don’t request 
examinations to comfort patients (or appease their consultants), to replace im-
ages already acquired elsewhere (or lost) simply to avoid medico-legal issues, or 
when the result will not aff ect management. To give an idea of relative doses, a 
CT of the abdomen and pelvis gives a typical eff ective dose of 500 times as much 
radiation  as  a  CXR.  This  important  factor  also  tells  us  about  the  preference  of 
ultrasound over CT when investigating abdominal and pelvic complaints such as 
acute appendicitis, especially given the youthful demographics of this diagnosis. 
Unwitting exposure of the unborn fetus to radiation is inexcusable at any stage 
of gestation—unless the mother’s life is in immediate danger—and it is the respon-
sibility of the referring clinician, as well as the radiographer and the radiologist, to 
ensure that this is avoided.

_OHCM_10e.indb   719

_OHCM_10e.indb   719

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

720

The art of the request

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

One  of  the  most  nerve-wracking  moments  that  you  can  encounter  as  a  recently 
qualiﬁ ed doctor is having to request an investigation from a seasoned consultant 
radiologist. What information do you need to give? How much? Who do you ask? 
Put yourself on the other side: what does the radiologist need to know to decide who 
needs what imaging and when? Keep the following in mind when requesting (never 
ordering!) an investigation:
Patient details Get the patient’s name right! Include hospital number and date of 
birth on all requests.
Clinical details Think of your clinical question, what answer are you hoping radiol-
ogy will provide? It can:
  • Conﬁ rm a suspected diagnosis.
  • ‘Exclude’ something important (though remember that exclusion is never 100%).
  • Deﬁ ne the extent of a disease.
  • Monitor the progress of a disease.
 Don’t forget to mention pertinent facts that may change the way the investigation 
is carried out: an agitated or confused patient may need sedation prior to an MRI 
of their head. A CT scan on a patient with an acutely raised creatinine may need to 
be done without contrast medium. Insertion of a drain on a patient with deranged 
clotting may need to wait while this is corrected. Include recent creatinine, Hb, and 
clotting on the form if appropriate. Don’t forget to mention anticoagulants, eg war-
farin, LMWH, and aspirin for intervention requests.
Investigation details What scan do you think is required, and how soon do you 
need it? Diff erent clinical questions require diff erent procedures. If you think the 
patient has a collection, would you like them to drain it? Always state whether in-
tervention is required (eg US abdo ± drain insertion). Remember that the radiologist 
ultimately decides what imaging or procedure they undertake based on the informa-
tion you have provided.
Tips
  • Know your patient well, but keep your request brief and accurate.
  • Know the clinical question and how the answer will change your management.
  • Look up previous imaging before you go; asking for a CT on a patient who had one 

yesterday makes you look foolish and will not go down well.

  • If in doubt, or if the investigation is very urgent, go down to the department in per-
son. Regard this as an important opportunity: involving a radiologist will result in 
the best selection of imaging technique for your clinical question, will help expedite 
urgent requests, and should be of educational value for you.

If your request is turned down Don’t be afraid to (politely) ask why. If you or 
your team still feel it is warranted, look back at the request; did you miss a relevant 
piece of information that would change the mind of the radiologist? If you still draw 
a blank, try speaking to a radiologist who specializes in that particular technique. 
Many  teams  have  clinical  radiology  meetings;  think  about  approaching  someone 
who appreciates why you are asking that particular question. Alternatively, go back 
to your team; speak to your senior, who may have a better understanding of why the 
investigation is needed and be able to convey this to the radiologist.
Remember that there is a patient at the heart of this, and you are their advocate. 
If the results of an investigation will change their management then explain this to 
the radiologist. Moreover, don’t forget to explain it to your patient. Being whisked off  
to the department for investigation and intervention can be particularly terrifying 
if you aren’t expecting it.

_OHCM_10e.indb   720

_OHCM_10e.indb   720

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

721

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Interpreting an image
You won’t always be able to get an immediate radiologist’s interpretation so it is 
important to know how to review an image. First make sure the image you are 
looking at is of your patient. Check its date. And remember:
  • Practice makes perfect—always look at the image before checking the report, 

learning how to distinguish normal from abnormal.

  • Understand how the scan is done—this makes interpretation easier and helps 
you appreciate which scan will give the answer you need. It also gives practical 
clues to the result—eg a routine CXR is performed in the postero-anterior (PA) 
direction (the source posterior to the patient to minimize the cardiac shadow).

  • Use a systematic approach—so that you don’t miss subtleties.
  • Understand your anatomy—virtually all investigations yield a 2D image from a 
3D structure. An understanding of anatomical relationships of the area in ques-
tion will help reconstruct the images in your mind.

  • Orientation—for axial cross-sectional imaging this is as if you are looking up at 
the supine patient from the feet. For images with non-conventional orienta-
tions (eg MRCP) look on the image for clue markings, or rely on your knowledge of 
anatomy—it can be tricky to visualize oblique sections!

  • Remember the patient—an investigation is only one part of the clinical work-up, 
don’t rely solely on the investigation result for your management decisions. Go 
back to see the patient after looking at the investigation and reading the radiolo-
gist’s report: you might notice something that you didn’t before.

Presenting an image
Everyone has their own method for presenting, and the right way is your own 
way. As long as you cover everything systematically—because we all get ‘hot-seat 
amnesia’ at some point—the particulars will take care of themselves. Continue 
to polish your own method and remember a few extra tips for when an image is 
presented expectantly by your consultant/examiner and the ﬂ oor is yours. A brief 
silence with a thoughtful expression as you analyse the image is ﬁ ne, then:
  • State the written details: name, date of birth, where and how the imaging was 
taken. Look for clues: weighting of an MRI, a ‘+ c’ indicating that contrast medium 
has been used, the phase of the investigation (arterial/venous/portal), or even 
the name of the organ printed on an ultrasound.

  • State the type, mode, and technical quality of investigation—not always easy!
Going through this list also gives you a bit of thinking time. Then:
  • Start with life-threatening or very obvious abnormalities. Then be systematic:
  • Is the patient’s position adequate? Any lines, leads, or tubes? Note their position.
  • Just like the bedside clues in a physical examination, there are clues in radiology 
examinations. Note oxygen masks, ECG leads, venous access, infusion apparatus, 
and invasive devices. Identifying what they are also helps you to look through 
what may otherwise appear to be a cluttered mess.

  • Note any abnormalities and try to contextualize these with whatever you al-
ready know of the patient. The abnormality may be hiding in plain sight, but if 
struggling, step back and note any asymmetry or areas that just ‘look diff erent’.
  • With cross-sectional imaging, scan through adjacent sections noting the anato-
my of one organ system or structure at a time (this may mean going up and down 
through a CT abdomen multiple times).

  • Giving a diff erential diagnosis is good practice, as not all ﬁ ndings are diagnostic.
  • If there is additional clinical information that would help you to make a diagno-

sis, don’t be afraid to ask. After all, we treat patients and not images!

Remember: 

•X-ray=radiodensity (lucency/opacity).  •CT=attenuation.
•US=echogenicity. 

•MRI=signal intensity.

_OHCM_10e.indb   721

_OHCM_10e.indb   721

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
722

Chest X-ray—part 1

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Images are usually taken on inspiration with the  X-ray source behind the patient 
(postero-anterior, PA). Mobile images may be antero-posterior (AP, ﬁ g 16.6), magnify-
ing heart size. If supine, distribution of air and ﬂ uid in lungs and pleural cavities is 
altered and the diaphragm is elevated.

Acclimatize yourself to the four cardinal elements of the chest radiograph, memo-
rably (albeit slightly inaccurately) termed bone, air, fat, and ‘water’/soft tissue. Each 
has its own radiographic density. A border is only seen at an interface of two 
densities, eg heart (soft tissue) and lung (air); this ‘silhouette’ is lost if air in the lung 
is replaced by consolidation (‘water’). The silhouette sign localizes pathology (eg 
middle lobe pneumonia or collapse causing loss of clarity of the right heart border, 
ﬁ g 16.2). When interpreting a CXR use a systematic approach that works for you, eg:
Technical quality
  • Rotation: The sternal ends of the clavicles should symmetrically overlie the trans-
verse processes of the 4th or 5th thoracic vertebrae. A rotated image can alter the 
position of structures, eg rotation to the right projects the aortic arch vessels over 
the right upper zone, appearing as though there is a mass.

  • Inspiration: There should be 5 to 7 ribs visible anteriorly (or 10 posteriorly). Hy-
perinﬂ ation can be abnormal, eg COPD. Poor inspiration can mimic cardiomegaly, as 
the heart is usually pulled down (hence elongated) with inspiration, and crowding 
of vessels at the lung bases can mimic consolidation or collapse. This is common 
in patients who are acutely unwell, particularly those in pain or unconscious. Take 
care in interpreting these images.

  • Exposure: An under-exposed image will be too white and an over-exposed image 
will be too black. Both cause a loss of deﬁ nition and quality although some com-
pensation can be made with standard viewing software.

  • Position: The entire lung margin should be visible.
Trachea Normally central or just to the right. Deviated by collapse (towards the le-
sion), expansion (away from the lesion), or patient rotation.
Mediastinum  May  be:  Widened  by  mediastinal  fat;  retrosternal  thyroid;  aortic 
aneurysm/unfolding; lymph node enlargement (sarcoidosis, lymphoma, metastases, 
TB); tumour (thymoma, teratoma); cysts (bronchogenic, pericardial); paravertebral 
mass (TB). Shifted towards a collapsed lung or away from processes that add vol-
ume (eg a large mass or a tension pneumothorax).

There  are  three  bulges  normally  visible  on  the  left  border  of  the  mediastinum 
that help identify pathology if abnormal. From superior to inferior they are: 1 Aortic 
knuckle. 2 Pulmonary outﬂ ow tract. 3 Left ventricle.
Hila The left hilum is higher than the right or at the same level (not lower); they 
should be the same size and density. The hila may be: Pulled up or down by ﬁ brosis 
or collapse. Enlarged by: pulmonary arterial hypertension; bronchogenic ca; lymph 
nodes. Sarcoidosis, TB, and lymphoma can give bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. 
Calciﬁ ed due to: sarcoid, past TB; silicosis; histoplasmosis (p408).
Heart Normally less than half of the width of the thorax (cardiothoracic ratio <0.5). ⅓ 
should lie to the right of the vertebral column, ⅔ to the left. It may appear elongated 
if the chest is hyperinﬂ ated (COPD); or enlarged if the image is AP or if there is LV 
failure (ﬁ g 16.3), or a pericardial eff usion. Are there calciﬁ ed valves?
Diaphragm The right side is often slightly higher (due to the liver). Causes of raised 
hemidiaphragm: Trouble above the diaphragm—lung volume loss or inﬂ ammation. 
Trouble with the diaphragm—stroke; phrenic nerve palsy (causes, p504; any medias-
tinal mass?). Trouble below the diaphragm—hepatomegaly; subphrenic abscess. NB: 
subpulmonic eff usion (eff usions having a similar contour to the diaphragm without 
a characteristic meniscus) and diaphragm rupture give apparent elevation. NB: bilat-
eral palsies (polio, muscular dystrophy) cause hypoxia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   722

_OHCM_10e.indb   722

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

723

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.2  Lower lobe collapse (right lung). The right heart border is obscured. Volume loss in 
the right lower zone results in a hyper-expanded right upper lobe that is more radiolucent 
than the left upper lobe.

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

Fig 16.3  ‘Bat’s wing’, peri-hilar pulmonary oedema indicating heart failure and ﬂ uid overload.
Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

_OHCM_10e.indb   723

_OHCM_10e.indb   723

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

724

Chest X-ray—part 2: the lungs 

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

The apex of the lower lobe rises up to the 4th rib posteriorly, so it is diffi  cult to as-
cribe the true location of a lobe on a PA image without additional information from a 
lateral view. It may therefore be better to use the term ‘zone’ rather than lobe when 
localizing a lesion.
Opaciﬁ cation Lung opacities are described as nodular, reticular (network of ﬁ ne 
lines, interstitial), or alveolar (ﬂ uff y). A single nodule may be called a space-occupying 
lesion (SOL).
Nodules: (If >3cm across, the term pulmonary mass is used instead.)
  • Neoplasia: metastases (often missed if small), lung cancer, hamartoma, adenoma.
  • Infections: varicella pneumonia, septic emboli, abscess (eg as an SOL), hydatid.
  • Granulomas: miliary TB, sarcoidosis (see GPA, p714), histoplasmosis.
  • Pneumoconioses (except asbestosis), Caplan’s syndrome (p696).
Reticular opaciﬁ cation: =Lung parenchymal changes.
  • Acute interstitial oedema.
  • Infection: acute (viral, bacterial), chronic (TB, histoplasmosis).
  • Fibrosis:  usual  interstitial  pneumonia  (UIP),  non-speciﬁ c  interstitial  pneumonia 
(NSIP), drugs (eg methotrexate, bleomycin, crack cocaine), connective tissue dis-
orders  (rheumatoid  arthritis—p546,  GPA—p714,  SLE,  PAN, systemic  sclerosis—p552, 
sarcoidosis), industrial lung diseases (silicosis, asbestosis).

  • Malignancy (lymphangitis carcinomatosa).
Alveolar opaciﬁ cation: = Airspace opaciﬁ cation, can be due to any material ﬁ lling 
the alveoli:
  • Pus—pneumonia.
  • Blood—haemorrhage, DIC (p352).
  • Water—heart,  renal,  or  liver  failure  (p302,  p274),  ARDS  (p186),  smoke  inhalation 

(p847), drugs (heroin), O2 toxicity, near drowning (OHCS p768).

  • Cells—lymphoma, adenocarcinoma.
  • Protein—alveolar proteinosis, ARDS, fat emboli (~7d post fracture).
‘Ring’ opacities: Either airways seen end-on (bronchitis; bronchiectasis) or cavitat-
ing lesions, eg abscess (bacterial, fungal, amoebic), tumour, or pulmonary infarct 
(wedge-shaped with a pleural base).
Linear opacities: Septal lines (Kerley B lines, ie interlobular lymphatics seen with 
ﬂ uid, tumour, or dusts); atelectasis; pleural plaques (asbestos exposure).
White-out of whole hemithorax: (ﬁ g 16.4) Pneumonia, large pleural eff usion, ARDS, 
post-pneumonectomy.
Gas outside the lungs Check for a pneumothorax (hard to spot if apical or in a 
supine image, can you see vascular markings right out to the periphery?), surgical 
emphysema (trauma, iatrogenic), and gas under the diaphragm (surgery, perforated 
viscus, trauma). Pneumomediastinum: Air tracks along mediastinum, into the neck. 
Due to rupture of alveolar wall (eg asthma or pulmonary barotrauma) or bronchial 
or oesophageal trauma (can be iatrogenic, eg from endoscope). Pneumopericar-
dium: Rare (usually iatrogenic).
Bones Check the clavicles for fracture, ribs for fractures and lesions (eg metasta-
ses), vertebral column for degenerative disease, collapse, or destruction, and shoul-
ders for dislocation, fracture, and arthritis.
An apparently normal CXR? Check for tracheal compression, absent breast shad-
ow (mastectomy), double left heart border (left lower lobe collapse, ﬁ g 16.5), ﬂ uid 
level behind the heart (hiatus hernia, achalasia), and paravertebral abscess (TB).

_OHCM_10e.indb   724

_OHCM_10e.indb   724

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

725

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.4  Opaciﬁ cation of the left hemithorax from consolidation.

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

Fig 16.5  Large right-sided pneumothorax; note the trachea remains central, suggesting this is a 
simple pneumothorax, not a tension pneumothorax.

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

_OHCM_10e.indb   725

_OHCM_10e.indb   725

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

726

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Chest X-ray—part 3
Conﬁ rming the position of various tubes, lines, and leads on a CXR can be a daunting 
task, as incorrect positioning can have deadly consequences: an NG tube which is 
misplaced can cause aspiration pneumonia, or a poorly positioned CVC can lead to 
fatal arrhythmias. However, this can be a straightforward task if you recall some 
basic anatomy (ﬁ gs 16.6, 16.7; table 16.2).
If you are unsure, always ask a senior.
Table 16.2  Radiological conﬁ rmation of device placement
Line/tube/lead
CVC (p774)

Correct position for tip(s)
In the SVC or brachiocephalic vein
In the SVC or brachiocephalic vein

PICC 
Tunnelled line, eg Hickman At the junction of the SVC and right atrium
Endotracheal
Nasogastric (p759)
Chest drain (p766)

3–7 cm above the carina (in adult)
10cm beyond the gastro-oesophageal junction
In the pleural space tracking either up (for pneumothorax) 
or down (for eff usion)
Atrial lead—in the right appendage
Ventricular lead—in the apex of the right ventricle

Cardiac pacemaker/tempo-
rary pacing wire (p776) 

Normal anatomy
  • The SVC begins at the right 1st anterior intercostal space.
  • The right atrium lies at the level of the 3rd intercostal space.
  • The carina should be visible at the level of T5–T7 thoracic vertebrae.
  • The right atrial appendage sits at the level of the 3rd intercostal space.
Common bleeps from nursing staff 

1      Central line not aspirating:

  • Is the tip in the right place (see earlier in topic) or has it gone up into the inter-
nal jugular, too far in (sitting against the tricuspid valve, does the patient have 
an arrhythmia?) or not far enough in (sitting against a venous valve)?

  • Is the tip kinked, suggesting it may be in a side vessel or against the vessel wall?
  • If the line looks appropriately positioned, consider ﬂ ushing gently, could the 

line be blocked?

2      Patient not ventilating well:

  • Is the ET tube down the right main bronchus (causes left lung collapse, or rarely 
right pneumothorax)? Retract tube to correct position (see earlier in topic).
  • Is the ET tube blocked? Most have a secondary port allowing ventilation even if 

the main hole is blocked, get anaesthetic assistance!

3      Chest drain not bubbling/swinging:

  • Is it correctly positioned (see earlier in topic)—if not in the pleural space, it 
cannot drain the air/ﬂ uid. Common problems include sitting in the soft tissue 
of the chest wall, or sitting above the eff usion, below the pneumothorax, or in 
the oblique ﬁ ssure.

  • Is it blocked? If draining an eff usion and correctly positioned, consider gently 
ﬂ ushing with 10mL of sterile saline, then aspirating. If not successful, obtain 
senior advice.

  • Has the eff usion/pneumothorax resolved? Pneumothoraces can rapidly resolve 

with a correctly positioned drain.
4      Unable to aspirate from NG tube:

  • Is  NG tube not far enough in/coiled in oesophagus? Tip is radio-opaque and 
should be visible below the diaphragm, if it is coiled it may lie in the pharynx or 
anywhere along the mediastinum.

  • Is NG tube passing down the trachea and into the bronchus? The oesophagus is 
(generally speaking) a straight vertical line, if the tube veers off  to left or right 
before it goes below the diaphragm, assume it is in the bronchus and replace it.

_OHCM_10e.indb   726

_OHCM_10e.indb   726

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

727

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.6  Image from ICU showing ET tube, CVC, and NG tube in situ with ECG leads placed across the 
chest. 
Image courtesy of Dr Elen Thomson, Leeds Teaching Hospitals.

Fig 16.7  Knowing where lines and tubes should be placed is an essential skill. An ET tube (orange) 
should sit 3–7cm above the carina; this one is slightly high. The tip of the CVC (red, here a right 
internal jugular line) should lie in the SVC, as seen here, or just in the right atrium. The tip of the NG 
tube (green) must be seen below the diaphragm to ensure it is placed in the oesophagus, not the 
trachea. Do not confuse external leads (blue) with internal lines.

_OHCM_10e.indb   727

_OHCM_10e.indb   727

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

728

Plain abdominal x-ray

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

These are rarely diagnostic and involve a radiation dose equivalent to 50 CXRS. Indica-
tions for AXR with acute abdominal symptoms:
  • Suspicion of obstruction (or intussusception, eg in paediatrics).
  • Acute ﬂ are of inﬂ ammatory bowel disease (eg to conﬁ rm/exclude megacolon).
  • Renal colic with known renal stones (if ﬁ rst presentation, CT KUB is better).
  • Ingestion of a sharp or poisonous foreign body (eg lithium battery).
Bowel gas pattern is best assessed on supine images and free intraperitoneal gas 
(signifying perforation) is best seen on an erect CXR (ﬁ g 13.26, p607).
Gas patterns Look for: an abnormal quantity of gas in the stomach, small intestine, 
or colon. Decide whether you are looking at small or large bowel (ﬁ g 16.8; table 16.3).
Small bowel diameter is normally ~2.5cm, the colon ~5cm, the caecum up to 10cm. Di-
lated small bowel is seen in obstruction and paralytic ileus. Dilated large bowel (6cm) 
is seen in both these, and also in ‘toxic dilatation’, and, in the elderly, in benign hypoto-
nicity. Grossly dilated segments of bowel (coff ee bean sign) are seen in sigmoid and 
caecal volvulae—ﬁ g 13.28c, p611. Loss of normal mucosal folds and bowel wall thicken-
ing are seen in inﬂ ammatory colitis (eg IBD)—ﬁ g 16.9. ‘Thumb-printing’ is protrusion of 
thickened mural folds into the lumen, seen in large bowel ischaemia and colitis.
Table 16.3  Radiological gas patterns in the bowel
Small bowel
 • Smaller calibre
 • Central; multiple loops
 • Valvuli conniventes:

Ileus
 • Both small and 

large bowel visible

Large bowel
 • Larger calibre
 • Peripheral
 • Semi-lunar folds:* don’t go 
all the way across the lu-
men, but may appear to do 
so if viewed from an angle

folds that go from wall to wall, all 
the way across the lumen; more 
regular and ﬁ ner than haustra

 • There is no clear 
transition point 
that corresponds 
to an obstructing 
lesion

 • Blacker (contains gas)†

 • Grey (contains air and ﬂ uid)
*Semi-lunar folds (plicae semilunares) lie in between adjacent haustra.
†The ascending colon contains liquid faeces, but the descending colon contains faecal pellets (scybala).
Gas outside the lumen You must explain any gas outside the lumen of the gut. It 
could be: 1 Pneumoperitoneum; signs on the supine AXR include: gas on both sides of 
the bowel wall (Rigler’s sign), a triangle of gas in the RUQ trapped beneath the falci-
form ligament, and a circle of gas beneath the anterior abdominal wall. Seen with 
bowel perforation but also after laparoscopic surgery. 2 Gas in the urinary tract—eg 
in the bladder from a ﬁ stula. 3 Gas in the biliary tree (see next paragraph), or rarely 
4 Intramural gas, found in bowel necrosis.
Biliary tree Any stones: ~10% visible on plain AXR. Any gas: (Pneumobilia.) Caused 
by: •post-ERCP/sphincterotomy •post-surgery (eg Whipple’s) •recent stone passage 
•anaerobic cholangitis (rare) •gallbladder–bowel ﬁ stula: gallstone migrates directly 
into the bowel (Rigler’s triad is seen in 25%: pneumobilia, small bowel obstruction, 
an ectopic gallstone). Calciﬁ cation: (‘Porcelain gallbladder’.) Chronic inﬂ ammation 
from gallstones (associated with gallbladder cancer).
Urinary tract Check for calculi (visible in 90% of cases)1 and normal anatomy: Kidneys: 
Length equivalent to 2½–3½ vertebral bodies, slope inferolaterally. Right is lower than 
the left (‘pushed down’ by the liver). Their outline can usually be seen due to surrounding 
layer of perinephric fat. Ureters: Pass near the tips of the lumbar transverse processes, 
cross the sacroiliac joints, down to the ischial spines, and turn medially to join the bladder.
Other soft tissues Look for size/position of: liver, spleen, and bladder. A big liver 
will push bowel to the left side of the abdomen. An enlarged spleen displaces bowel 
and stomach bubble to the right. A big bladder elevates these.
Medical devices Double-J and biliary stents, nephrostomy and gastrostomy tubes, 
intrauterine devices, laparoscopic clips, and peritoneal dialysis catheters can be seen.
Bones and joints Plain AXR is not ideal, but there may be important abnormalities. 
In the lumbar spine, look for scoliosis and degeneration (osteophytes, joint space 
narrowing) as well as bone metastases or sacroiliitis.
1  Don’t get confused by other calciﬁ cations—eg phleboliths: harmless calciﬁ cations found in the perivesical 
veins (rounded with a radiolucent centre).

_OHCM_10e.indb   728

_OHCM_10e.indb   728

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

729

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.8  Multiple dilated air-ﬁ lled loops of large and small bowel. This 
pattern is seen in ileus.  
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig  16.9  Abdominal  image  showing  toxic  megacolon  associated  with 
ulcerative colitis, note colon wall thickening and loss of mucosal folds.

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

_OHCM_10e.indb   729

_OHCM_10e.indb   729

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

730

Computed tomography (CT)

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Can give whole-body images in under one breath (thanks to continuous, helical data 
acquisition). Within a single slice (eg 0.5 or 5mm thick), CT records the attenuation 
(=loss of energy from, eg absorption or reﬂ ection) of diff erent tissues to ionizing ra-
diation and calculates a mean value for a given volume of tissue (a ‘voxel’). This value 
is represented in greyscale as a single point, called a pixel, in the ﬁ nal 2D image (or 3D 
‘reconstruction’—ﬁ g 16.13). The greyscale of the pixel is measured on the Hounsﬁ eld 
scale (see ﬁ g 16.10) relative to the attenuation of water, 0 Hounsﬁ eld units (HU), and 
air, Ω1000HU. The human eye and display systems have a limited greyscale range, so 
diff erent settings (levels and ‘windows’) are used to focus on diff erences in attenuation 
in ranges typical for tissues of diff erent density, eg bone or lung (ﬁ g 16.11).
CTS are responsible for up to 40% of iatrogenic radiation in high-use settings, which 
could account for ~1% of all cancers: always balance beneﬁ ts of CT vs other modali-
ties with less or no radiation (ultrasound; MRI), particularly in the young or in those 
with chronic disease likely to undergo multiple imaging investigations. Discuss with 
a radiologist—there are several technical aspects of imaging that can limit radiation 
dose whilst still providing clinically useful information.
Imaging of choice for
  • Staging and monitoring most malignant disease.
  • Intracranial pathology, eg stroke, trauma, ICP, and space-occupying lesions.
  • Trauma.
  • Pre-operative assessment of complex masses.
  • Assessment of acute abdomen (ﬁ gs 16.15, 16.16). NB ultrasound increasingly used 

(p736).

  • Following abdominal surgery.
Contrast  medium  (p748)  Enhance  anatomical  detail  by  use  of  a  high-  or  low 
(water)-attenuating medium to ﬁ ll the lumen of a structure. Give IV to image vascu-
lar anatomy (ﬁ g 16.12) and vascular structures (including highly perfused tumours). 
Images acquired at diff erent times (‘phases’) after injection will show the agent in 
arterial  or  venous  structures  or  during  ‘washout’  (=clearing).  Perfusion  CT  maps 
cerebral blood ﬂ ow by acquiring serial images after contrast administration then 
combines these into a colour-coded image of perfusion times (ﬁ g 16.14). Ensure IV 
cannulae secure and suffi  cient gauge to allow for rapid injection of agent as bolus—
extravasation of contrast can cause signiﬁ cant tissue damage. Give PO eg 1–12h before 
imaging bowel. Give PR for examining distal colonic lumen.

Contrast-enhanced  CTS  may  include  a  pre-contrast  series.  Unenhanced  imaging 
alone reduces radiation exposure and may be adequate for images of the brain, spine, 
lung, and musculoskeletal system or necessary in those with renal failure (contrast is 
nephrotoxic).
Streak artefact Remember that the CT slice image is a matrix representation of 
the attenuation produced by rotating around the patient. High-attenuation items 
such as metal ﬁ llings, clips, and prostheses (and even bone) can cause interference.
CT combined with PET (See p739.) Combines the anatomical detail of CT with the 
metabolic information of PET, to aid assessment of, eg neoplastic lesions. Radiation 
doses are much higher than CT alone.

_OHCM_10e.indb   730

_OHCM_10e.indb   730

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

731

Fig 16.10  The Hounsﬁ eld scale.

Courtesy of Dr T Turmezei.

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.11  Axial  high-resolution  CT 
chest  on  a  lung  window  algorithm; 
note solitary lesion in the right lung 
(in this case, from GPA). 

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Fig  16.12  Axial  CT  of  the  abdomen 
after  IV contrast (arterial phase). The 
tortuous  splenic  artery  is  enhanced 
(arrow)—so  is  the  aorta,  but  not  the 
inferior vena cava (compare to water in 
the stomach).

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Fig  16.13  Surface  rendered  3D  CT 
reconstruction of the pelvis. The pos-
terior aspect of the right acetabulum 
is fractured. The right femur has been 
digitally removed for better viewing.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

Fig 16.14  Cerebral perfusion CT show-
ing ischaemia around the Sylvian ﬁ s-
sure (arrow).

Courtesy of Dr C Cousens.

_OHCM_10e.indb   731

_OHCM_10e.indb   731

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

732

CT images of two patients with acute abdominal pain

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.15  The history was of central abdominal pain with a non-peritonitic abdomen. The 
CT shows a leaking AAA. Under ﬂ uoroscopic screening, this can be repaired using stents, 
inserted via femoral arterial puncture and deployed in the aneurysm (p654). This kind of 
endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is commonly used in the treatment of leaking AAA 
as well as elective repair of intact but enlarging aneurysms.

The changing roles of surgeons and CT in the acutely unwell
In the days when general surgeons did their rounds towards the end of an on-call 
day, there would be wards of patients with undiagnosed abdominal pain having 
‘drip-and-suck’ regimens (IVI and NGT) while awaiting improvement or a change 
in their clinical condition that revealed the need for surgery. On opening up, the 
surgeon would try to deal with whatever pathology was found. With increased 
subspecialization and accurate emergency imaging (CT and US), patients are now 
matched to a team best equipped to deal with their condition. In this context, 
drip-and-suck is on the ebb, giving way to imaging, early intervention, rapid dis-
charge, or onward referral. With increasing pressures to safeguard surgical beds 
for elective cases and on junior surgeons to polish their surgical logbooks in de-
creased training hours, can come attempts to deﬂ ect away from surgical teams 
the care of patients in whom imaging or clinical circumstances suggest no current 
requirement for an operation. But is this always appropriate? Do we expect on-call 
surgeons to be practitioners of medicine, assessing and managing patients with 
surgical pathology, even if a trip to the operating theatre is not currently called for, 
or simply technicians restricted to cutting?

_OHCM_10e.indb   732

_OHCM_10e.indb   732

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

733

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.16  Triple-phase CT abdomen, cropped to show the pancreas. Top panel—unenhanced 
image, middle panel—arterial phase of contrast medium to look for pseudocysts and pa-
renchymal enhancement, bottom panel—portal venous phase to look at veins. The history 
here was also central abdominal pain with a non-peritonitic abdomen. The CT shows an en-
larged pancreatic head with fat stranding around the duodenopancreatic groove (‘groove 
pancreatitis’), and two small areas of ﬂ uid attenuation posteriorly, likely to be pseudocysts.
Top panel courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

_OHCM_10e.indb   733

_OHCM_10e.indb   733

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

734

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

1      A large proportion of the human body is fat or water (~80%).
2      Fat and water contain a large number of hydrogen nuclei (unpaired protons).
3      The spin of a positively charged hydrogen nucleus gives it magnetic polarity.
Thus…
  • Placing the human body in a magnetic ﬁ eld aligns its hydrogen nuclei either with 

(parallel) or against (anti-parallel) the ﬁ eld.

  • A radiofrequency (RF) pulse at the resonant frequency ﬂ ips a few nuclei away from 
their original alignment by an angle depending on the amount of energy they absorb.
  • When the RF pulse stops, the nuclei ﬂ ip back (or relax) into their original alignment, 

emitting the energy (called an echo) that was absorbed from the RF pulse.

  • Measuring and plotting the energy of the returning signal according to location 
(provided the nuclei haven’t moved) gives a picture of fat, tissue, and water as 
distributed throughout the body.

  • The hydrogen nuclei in ﬂ owing blood move after receiving the RF pulses. The echo is 

not detected, and so the vessel lumen appears black (ﬂ ow void).

Rather than radiodensity or attenuation, the correct descriptive terminology for the 
greyscale seen in MRI is signal intensity: high signal appears white and low signal black 
(see  table 16.4). Weighting is a quality of MRI that is dependent on the time between 
the RF pulses (repetition time, TR) and the time between an RF pulse and the echo (echo 
time, TE). MR images are most commonly T1-weighted (good for visualizing anatomy) 
or T2-weighted (good for visualizing disease) but can also be a mixture of both, called 
proton density (PD) weighting. FLAIR sequences produce heavily T2-weighted images. 
A good way to determine the weighting of an MR image is to look for water—eg in the 
aqueous humour of the eye, CSF, or synovial ﬂ uid (see table 16.4; ﬁ g 16.17).
Table 16.4  MRI sequence characteristics

TR
TE
Low 
signal

High 
signal

T1-weighted
Short (<1000ms)
Short (<30ms)
Water
Flowing Hb
Fresh Hb
Haemosiderin

Bone marrow
Fat
Cholesterol
Gadolinium (p762)
MetHb

T2-weighted
Long (>2000ms)
Long (>80ms)
Bone
Flowing Hb
DeoxyHb
Haemosiderin
Melanin
Water
Cholesterol
Fresh Hb
MetHb

Fig 16.17  T1-weighted MRI of the hips. Normal 
adult  bone  marrow  is  high  signal  due  to  fat; 
note also low signal from urine in the bladder.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department

Advantages MRI’s great bonus is that it 
does not involve ionizing radiation. It has 
no known long-term adverse eff ects. It is 
excellent for imaging soft tissues (water- and hence proton-dense) and is preferred 
over CT for musculoskeletal disorders and for many intracranial, head, and neck pa-
thologies (ﬁ gs 16.18–16.20). Multiplanar acquisition of images can provide multiple 
views  and  3D  reconstruction  from  one  scan.  MR  angiography  is  also  excellent  for 
reconstructing vascular anatomy. This avoids the need for invasive angiography with 
femoral puncture or CT contrast in patients with renal impairment.
Disadvantages Long acquisition times. Poor imaging of lung parenchyma. Claustro-
phobic. Incompatible with some metal implants. High cost and specialized interpre-
tation (=limited availability).
Contraindications  Absolute:  •Pacemakers;  other  implanted  electrical  devices. 
•Metallic foreign bodies, eg intra-ocular (consider orbital X-ray to exclude), shrapnel. 
•Non-compatible surgical clips/coils/heart valves. Relative: •If unable to complete 
the pre-scan questionnaire. •Cochlear implants. NB: orthopaedic prostheses and ex-
tracranial metallic clips are generally safe. If uncertain, ask a radiologist. Contrast: 
•Renal impairment (gadolinium can cause systemic ﬁ brosis). •Allergy. •Pregnancy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   734

_OHCM_10e.indb   734

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

735

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.18  T2-weighted  sagittal  MRI  of 
the cervical spine. There is impingement 
of  the  spinal  cord  at  the  C4/5  and  C5/6 
levels  caused  by  degenerative  disease. 
C2 (axis) is identiﬁ able from the odontoid 
peg,  which  is  embryologically  derived 
from the body of C1 (atlas). 
 Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig 16.19  Axial T1-weighted MRI of the 
brain  post-IV  gadolinium.  In  the  right 
temporo-parietal region there is a small 
area  of  high  signal  enhancement  with 
a more central area of low signal, sur-
rounded by a region of low signal (pre-
sumably vasogenic cerebral oedema) in 
comparison to the normal brain tissue. 
This is all causing mass eff ect with ef-
facement of the sulci and adjacent right 
frontal  horn  of  the  lateral  ventricle. 
There is very subtle midline shift. 
 Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig  16.20  Axial  T2-weighted  MRI  of 
the  same  patient  at  the  same  level  as 
ﬁ g 16.19. The high signal in the temporo-
parietal  region  is  the  oedema  causing 
mass  eff ect.  The  diagnosis  was  of  a 
solitary metastasis. In this T2-weighted 
image the oedema and the cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid are of high signal due to their 
water content. 
 Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   735

_OHCM_10e.indb   735

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
736

Ultrasound (US)

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Unlike the other methods of imaging, US doesn’t use electromagnetic radiation. In-
stead, it relies on properties of longitudinal sound waves. This has made it a popular 
and safe form of imaging with increasingly widespread applications. High-frequency 
sound waves (3–15MHz) are generated in the transducer (transmitter and receiver) 
by the vibrations of a piezo-electric quartz crystal as a voltage is applied. Passage of 
sound waves through tissue is aff ected by attenuation and reﬂ ection. Attenuation 
disperses waves out of the receiver’s range, but it is the waves reﬂ ected back to the 
transducer that determine the image. Its quality depends on the diff erence in acoustic 
impedance between adjacent soft tissues.
Processing With the help of software a real-time 2D image is made. During process-
ing, an average attenuation value is assumed throughout the tissue examined, so if 
a higher-than-average attenuation structure is in the superﬁ cial tissues (eg ﬁ brous 
tissue, calciﬁ cation,  or  gas),  then  everything  deep  to  it  will  be  in  a  low  intensity 
(black) acoustic shadow. If a lower-than-average attenuation object (eg ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled/ 
cystic structure) is in the superﬁ cial tissues then everything deep to it will be high 
intensity (white) or enhanced. If a tissue interface is strongly disparate, eg gas in 
the intestine, then all the waves are reﬂ ected back, making it impossible to image 
beyond it. See also ﬁ gs 16.21–16.24.
Modes B: (Brightness) is the most common, giving 2D slices that map the diff erent 
magnitudes of echo in greyscale. M: (Movement) traces the movement of structures 
within the line of the sound beam. It is used in imaging, eg heart valves (p110).
Duplex ultrasonography (ﬂ ow and morphology) By combining Doppler eff ects 
(shifts in wavelength caused by movement of a source or reﬂ ecting surface) with 
B-mode  ultrasound  technology,  ﬂ ow  characteristics  of  blood  can  be  inferred  (ﬁ g 
16.21). This is extremely useful in arterial and venous studies, and echocardiography.
Advantages Portable; fast; non-ionizing; cheap; real-time; can be used with interven-
tion; can enter organs, eg rectum, vagina, bowel. Endoscopic US can be used to stage 
and biopsy lung and GI tract cancers, eg stomach, pancreas, and also image the heart = 
transoesophageal echocardiogram or TOE, p110. 
Disadvantages Operator dependent—interoperator variability high; poor quality if 
patient is obese; interference from bone, bowel gas, calculi, or superimposed organs 
can limit depth and quality of imaging.

Fig 16.21  A normal Duplex US of the right common carotid artery with a ﬂ ow rate=77cm/s. The 
Doppler trace (orange) is displayed below the main image.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   736

_OHCM_10e.indb   736

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

737

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.22  Ultrasound  of  the  liver 
shows the common bile duct (CBD) to 
be dilated. Distal obstruction of the 
CBD causes proximal dilatation of the 
duct. It is important to correlate the 
width of the CBD with the ALP, as the 
normal diameter varies with age and 
previous  interventions.  Also  check 
that the distal CBD tapers as it enters 
the duodenum. NB: the portal vein lies 
posterior to the duct (along with the 
hepatic artery) in the free edge of the 
lesser omentum. Next, ask ‘What is 
causing the obstruction?’ and ‘Where 
can I get that information?’

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology 
Department.

Fig  16.23  Ultrasound  of  the  kid-
ney.  At  ﬁ rst  the  image  may  seem 
normal but there is a wedge of pos-
terior acoustic shadow cast by the 
object  which  is  causing  increased 
echogenicity 
lower  pole 
in  the 
calyces.  Acoustic  shadows  in  the 
kidney suggest stones—as here—or 
nephrocalcinosis.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology 
Department.

Fig  16.24  Longitudinal  ultrasound 
of the right lobe of the liver show-
ing  a  well-deﬁ ned  small  area  of 
echogenicity. This is the typical ap-
pearance of a liver haemangioma, a 
common benign liver lesion.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology 
Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   737

_OHCM_10e.indb   737

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

738

Nuclear medicine

The majority of medical imaging is concerned with passing external waves (eg ra-
diation) through the patient to a detector, and measuring scatter, slowing, or other 
alterations by various tissues. Nuclear medicine is the opposite; it measures emitted 
radiation from an internal source, introduced into the patient via injection, inhala-
tion, or ingestion. It can be diagnostic (eg PET scanning) or therapeutic (eg radio-
iodine (I131) ablation in thyrotoxicosis).

Because  molecules  labelled  with  radioisotopes  are  introduced  into  the  patient, 
there is exposure to ionizing radiation, though doses are usually less than those from 
CT (see table 16.1, p719). The selection of molecule for labelling depends on the tissue 
of interest, as it should be something that will be readily taken up by that tissue, eg 
bisphosphonates for bone, glucose for fast-turnover tissue. Examples include:
Ventilation/perfusion  (VQ)  scan  Uses  inhaled  technetium  (Tc)  or,  less  commonly, 
xenon-133  (133Xe)  plus  injected  99mTc  macro-aggregates,  which  lodge  in  lung  capillar-
ies. Normal perfusion excludes PE but ventilation component requires a normal CXR for 
comparison (ﬁ gs 16.25, 16.26). Due to the large number of ‘indeterminate’ scans VQ is 
considered inferior to CTPA for the investigation of PE except in pregnancy (see p192).

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.25  Ventilation scintigram.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology 
Department.

16.26  Perfusion 

Fig 
showing mismatches with ﬁ g 16.25.

scintigram 

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology 
Department.

Fig 16.27  Bone 
scintigram showing 
metastases.

Courtesy of Norwich 
Radiology Department.

Bone scintigraphy  99mTc-labelled bisphosphonates are readily taken up by bone, 
and concentrate in areas of pathology, eg tumours, fractures. It is much more sensi-
tive in identifying metastases than X-ray, where lesions may not appear until >50% 
of bone matrix has been destroyed (ﬁ g 16.27).
Thyroid disease TcO4 is used for diff erentiating Graves’, toxic multinodular goitre, 
and subacute thyroiditis (ﬁ g 13.22, p601) as well as identifying ectopic tissue, func-
tioning nodules, and residual/recurrent thyroid tissue after surgery. ~15% of cold 
(non-functioning) nodules are malignant. Hot nodules are often toxic adenomas.
Phaeochromocytoma Iodine-123 (123I) meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is taken 
up by sympathetic tissues, and indicates functioning, ectopic, and metastatic ad-
renal medullary (+other neural crest) tumours. 131I-MIBG is also used for treatment.
Hyperparathyroidism  99mTc-methoxyisobutyl  isonitrile  (MIBI)  scans  can  detect 
parathyroid adenomas.
Haemorrhage Red cells are removed from the patient and labelled with 99mTc, then re-
injected to allow identiﬁ cation of a bleeding point. Used in both acute (after endoscopy 
and CT) and chronic GI bleeding, red cell scans are more sensitive than CT angiography 
and useful in intermittent bleeding, although localization can be challenging.

_OHCM_10e.indb   738

_OHCM_10e.indb   738

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

739

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.28  DMS  showing  relative  renal 
function of each kidney.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Renal  function  Chromium-51  (51Cr)  EDTA  or 
DTPA (99mTc, p669) is used to assess GFR. 99mTc-
mercapto-acetyltriglycine  (MAG3)  technique 
assesses  relative  (left–right)  renal  function 
and renal transit time (eg in renovascular dis-
ease).  99mTc-dimercaptosuccinic  acid  (DMSA) 
scanning  (ﬁ g  16.28)  is  the  gold  standard  for 
evaluation of renal scarring that occurs, eg in 
reﬂ ux nephropathy.
Positron emission tomography (PET) One of 
the key investigations in malignancy, but also 
has a wide range of other uses. If the tracer 
chosen is 18F-ﬂ uorodeoxyglucose (FDG), a short 
half-life glucose analogue, it becomes concen-
trated in metabolically active tissues. FDG de-
cays rapidly to produce a positron that, after travelling a few millimetres through 
tissue, annihilates with an electron to produce a pair of high-energy photons (gamma 
rays), which PET detects. Normal high uptake of FDG occurs in brain, liver, kidney, blad-
der, larynx, and lymphoid tissue of pharynx and must be considered when assess-
ing images. Neoplasms have high uptake of FDG with hotspots suggesting primary 
disease or metastases. Since inﬂ ammatory lesions will also show high uptake, there 
is a risk of false-positive results (eg sarcoid, TB); diagnosis must be conﬁ rmed with 
histology of suspicious lesions. PET allows staging of many solid organ malignancies 
(lung, melanoma, oesophageal) as well as lymphomas, and is particularly useful for 
planning of radiotherapy and surgery for both primary disease and metastases. PET 
can also be used to image occult sources of infection. PET can be combined with CT 
or MRI to provide high-quality images combining anatomy with physiology. A range 
of alternative tracers are now entering clinical use with radiotracers conjugated 
to other tissue-speciﬁ c substrates (eg 11C-labelled metomidate to detect tumors of 
adrenocortical origin, somatostatin tracers in neuroendocrine tumours, and amyloid 
tracers in Alzheimer’s disease).
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) Similar to PET but rather 
than using positron emission, it uses a radioisotope-labelled molecule as per con-
ventional nuclear imaging, but with two gamma cameras for detection. The images 
produced are of lower resolution than PET but the isotopes used are longer lived and 
more easily available. Examples include myocardial perfusion scanning (p741).

_OHCM_10e.indb   739

_OHCM_10e.indb   739

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

740

Cardiovascular imaging

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Courtesy of Dr C Cousins.

Fig 16.29  CT angiogram showing type A (ascend-
ing) aortic dissection with haemopericardium.

CT Cardiac  CT: Modern  CT scanners can acquire images with suffi  cient speed and 
resolution to image coronary arteries and exclude signiﬁ cant disease with a nega-
tive  predictive  value  of  97–99%.  It 
can also visualize CABG patency, pro-
vide  coronary  artery  Ca2+  scoring 
(a  risk  factor  for  coronary  artery 
disease,  p117),  demonstrate  car-
diac  anatomy  including  congenital 
anomalies, and estimate ventricular 
function. Vascular CT: Has become 
routine  in  emergency  assessment 
of  suspected  dissections,  ruptured 
aneurysms, and arterial and venous 
thromboses  (ﬁ g  16.29).  CT  angiog-
raphy has overtaken invasive angi-
ography in the assessment of many 
conditions  such  as  stable  angina 
and renal artery stenosis.
Catheter angiography Wherever intervention may be required, contrast studies 
such as angiography provide both image clarity and the possibility of proceeding 
to  intervention,  eg  angioplasty  or  stenting  of  vessels,  endovascular  repair  of  an-
eurysms,  clipping/coiling  of  aneurysms  (see  p746).  Remember  that  these  have  a 
high burden of both radiation and contrast medium, so check renal function before 
requesting. Complications include those of arterial puncture (bleeding, infection, 
thrombosis, dissection, pseudoaneurysm formation) plus cholesterol emboli, throm-
boemboli, and vasospasm.
MRI Cardiac MRI using ECG-gating to acquire the imaging data and relate it to the 
position in the cardiac cycle (best when the patient is in sinus rhythm) can reduce 
movement artefact and lead to excellent resolution images for functional assess-
ment. This, coupled with a lack of radiation, makes it ideal for the assessment of 
a  wide  range  of  structural  and  functional  heart  diseases.  Flow  velocities  can  be 
measured and, because the ﬂ ow is proportional to the pressure diff erences, degrees 
of stenosis and regurgitation across heart valves can be calculated. Myocardial in-
farction, perfusion, and viability can also be imaged with the use of IV gadolinium 
contrast  (p748).  Vascular  MRI  is  used  to  limit  radiation  exposure  where  multiple 
investigations may be required over a long time period, eg follow-up of intracranial 
aneurysm coiling, aortic root size in a young patient with Marfan’s syndrome (p706), 
or Takayasu’s arteritis (p712).
Ultrasound Non-invasive, relatively low cost, and with no radiation, US is excellent 
for  assessing  the  heart  and  vasculature  particularly  in  acute  settings  where  the 
test can be performed at the bedside. Cardiac US (=echocardiography) evaluates 
myocardial and valvular anatomy and function (p110). The use of exercise or pharma-
cological agents for ‘stress echocardiography’ can permit more detailed functional 
assessment. Vascular US Doppler ultrasonography is widely used for detection of 
thrombotic disease (eg DVT p578, portal vein thrombosis p276) and carotid athero-
sclerosis (p472).
Multiple gated acquisition (MUGA) scanning is a non-invasive way to measure left 
ventricle ejection fraction. After injection of 99mTc-labelled RBCS, a dynamic image of 
the left ventricle is obtained for a few hundred heartbeats by gamma camera. Since 
estimates of LVEF show less inter-operator variation than with echocardiograpy, uses 
include the detailed serial assessment of LVEF in patients undergoing cardiotoxic chem-
otherapy (eg anthracyclines, trastuzumab).

_OHCM_10e.indb   740

_OHCM_10e.indb   740

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Myocardial perfusion imaging A non-invasive method of assessing regional myo-
cardial blood ﬂ ow and the cellular integrity of myocytes. The technique uses radio-
nuclide tracers which cross the myocyte membrane and are trapped intracellularly. 
Thallium-201 (201Tl), a K+ analogue, is distributed via regional myocardial blood ﬂ ow 
and requires cellular integrity for uptake. Newer technetium-99 (99Tc)-based agents 
are similar to  201Tl but  have  improved  imaging  characteristics,  and  can  be  used 
to assess myocardial perfusion and LV performance in the same study (ﬁ g 16.30). 
Myocardial territories supplied by unobstructed coronary vessels have normal per-
fusion whereas regions supplied by stenosed coronary vessels have poorer relative 
perfusion, a diff erence that is accentuated by exercise. For this reason, exercise tests 
are used in conjunction with radionuclide imaging to identify areas at risk of ischae-
mia/infarction. Exercise scans are compared with resting views: reversible (ischae-
mia) or ﬁ xed defects (infarct) can be seen and the coronary artery involved reliably 
predicted. Drugs (eg adenosine, dobutamine, and dipyridamole) can also be used to 
induce perfusion diff erences between normal and underperfused tissues.

Myocardial perfusion imaging adds information in patients presenting with acute 
MI (to determine the amount of myocardium salvaged by thrombolysis) and in diag-
nosing acute chest pain in those without classical ECG changes (to deﬁ ne the pres-
ence of signiﬁ cant perfusion defects).

741

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig 16.30  99Tc perfusion study showing perfusion defect in the left ventricle anterior and 
lateral walls at stress which is partially reversible (diff erence between stress and rest im-
ages). This study is good for small vessel disease such as in diabetes; CT and coronary angi-
ography do not show small vessel disease well.

Courtesy of Dr C Cousins.

_OHCM_10e.indb   741

_OHCM_10e.indb   741

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

742

Gastrointestinal imaging

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Ultrasound  Widely  used  for  imaging  all  intra-abdominal  organs,  including  an 
emerging role in small bowel imaging (though overlying bowel gas can cast acoustic 
shadows). US is the 1st-line imaging choice for abnormal LFTS, jaundice, hepatomeg-
aly, renal dysfunction, and abdominal masses. Ensure the patient is ‘nil by mouth’ 
for 4 hours beforehand (aids gallbladder ﬁ lling). Pelvic US needs a full bladder (con-
sider clamping the catheter if appropriate). US may also guide diagnostic biopsy and 
therapeutic aspiration of cysts or collections.
CT plays an important role in the investigation of acute abdominal pain (see pp730–3). 
It is unparalleled in the detection of free gas and intra-abdominal collections, and 
allows good visualization of the colon and retroperitoneal areas. Oral or IV contrast 
medium enhances deﬁ nition (p730). The big disadvantage is the radiation dose. CT 
colonography (CTC; ﬁ g 16.31) uses rectal air or CO2 insuffl  ation, usually coupled with 
an oral ‘stool tagging’ agent to visualize the colonic mucosa in those unﬁ t for endo-
scopic evaluation or in whom endoscopic evaluation has failed (eg in a stenosing tu-
mour, where it can be used to assess the proximal colon and allow assessment of liver 
and nodal metastases at the same time). A negative test can be regarded as deﬁ nitive 
but if polyps or masses are seen then patients will usually require a colonoscopy.
Wireless capsule endoscopy: See p248.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) This gives excellent soft tissue imaging, giving 
it an important role in imaging the liver, biliary system, pancreas, and pancreatic duct 
(MRCP—magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; ﬁ g 16.32). As well as assessing 
potential malignant disease, MRCP is the imaging modality of choice for detection of 
common bile duct stones that can be missed on US. MRI performed after ﬂ uid loading 
of the small bowel (ﬂ uid delivered orally=MRI enterography; ﬂ uid delivered via nasodu-
odenal tube=MRI enteroclysis) permits assessment of small bowel inﬂ ammation (eg 
Crohn’s) and lesions that can be challenging to reach with conventional endoscopy.
Endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatography  (ERCP;  ﬁ g  16.33)  Indica-
tions: No longer routinely used for diagnosis, it still has a signiﬁ cant therapeutic 
role: sphincterotomy for common bile duct stones; stenting of benign or malignant 
strictures and obtaining brushings to diagnose the nature of a stricture. Method: 
A catheter is advanced from a side-viewing duodenoscope via the ampulla into the 
common bile duct. Contrast medium is injected and images taken to show lesions in 
the biliary tree and pancreatic ducts. Complications: Pancreatitis; bleeding; cholan-
gitis; perforation. Mortality <0.2% overall; 0.4% if performing stone removal.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS; see p736.) Commonly used in diagnosis of upper GI 
abnormalities, and is excellent for diagnosis of oesophageal, gastric, and pancreatic 
cancers.  It  allows  staging  by  assessing  depth  of  invasion,  as  well  as  histological 
diagnosis by biopsy of lesions.
Contrast  studies  (ﬁ g  16.34)  These  can  help  in  dysphagia  (p250)  and  assessing 
integrity  of  anastomoses  post-op.  Real-time  ﬂ uoroscopic  imaging  studies  assess 
swallowing function. Barium gives better contrast but iodine-based water-soluble 
contrast medium is used if there is a concern of perforation. Contrast enemas are 
increasingly obsolete and now used to exclude a leak following a low anterior resec-
tion, for proctograms, and not much else.

_OHCM_10e.indb   742

_OHCM_10e.indb   742

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

743

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.31  Axial  CT  colonogram:  mural 
thickening (?ascending colon tumour).
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig  16.32  MRCP  of  the  biliary  system 
showing: left hepatic duct (yellow arrow); 
multiple  gallstones  in  the  gallbladder 
(black  arrow);  common  bile  duct  (white 
arrow); pancreatic duct (red arrow); duo-
denum (green arrow).
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig 16.33  The ERCP shows a dilated com-
mon bile duct. The multiple ﬁ lling defects 
are calculi within and obstructing the duct.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig  16.34  Barium  swallow:  note  ‘cork-
screw’  appearance  of  the  oesophagus 
found in some motility disorders.
Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   743

_OHCM_10e.indb   743

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

744

Genitourinary imaging

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Ultrasound
Imaging modality of choice for genitourinary problems. Can be used to assess:
Kidneys:
  • Renal size—small in chronic kidney disease, large in renal masses, cysts, hypertro-
phy if other kidney missing, polycystic kidney disease (ﬁ g 16.35), and rarities (eg 
amyloidosis, p370).

  • Hydronephrosis, which may indicate ureteric obstruction or reﬂ ux (ﬁ g 13.49, p641).
  • Perinephric collections (trauma, post-biopsy).
  • Renal perfusion (assessment of renovascular disease: Doppler US of renal arteries).
  • Transplanted kidneys (collections, obstruction, perfusion).
Lower urinary tract:
  • Bladder volume: useful in assessment of the need to catheterize (see p640) or for 
assessment of adequacy of bladder emptying (post-micturition residual volume).
  • Prostate: transrectal ultrasound enables US-guided biopsy of focal lesions. NB: pros-

tate size does not correlate with symptoms.

Other:
  • Ovarian cysts, size, infections (pyosalpinx), uterine ﬁ broids and other masses.
  • Testicular masses, hydrocele, varicocele.
Advantages: Fast; cheap; independent of renal function; no IV contrast or radiation 
risk. Disadvantages: Intraluminal masses (transitional cell ca) in the upper tracts 
may not be seen; not a functional study; only suggests obstruction if there is dilata-
tion of the collecting system (95% of obstructed kidneys) and so can miss obstruc-
tion from, eg retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis.
CT (ﬁ g 16.36) First choice in renal colic. Performed without intravenous contrast so 
safe in renal impairment; such unenhanced images miss <2% of stones, but can show 
other pathologies. With IV contrast, CT can delineate masses (cystic or solid, contrast 
enhancement, calciﬁ cation, local/distant extension, renal vein involvement); assess 
renal trauma (presence of two kidneys; haemorrhage; devascularization; laceration; 
urine leak); and show retroperitoneal lesions.  CT has all but replaced intravenous 
urography and the radiation dose is similar.
Plain abdominal X-ray Can be used to look at the kidneys, the paths of the ureters, 
and bladder. However, in practice it is only useful for monitoring known renal calculi.
Contrast  studies  Retrograde  pyelography/ureterograms  are  good  at  showing 
pelvi-calyceal,  ureteric  anatomy,  and  transitional  cell  carcinomas  (TCCS).  Contrast 
medium is injected via a ureteric catheter. With the advent of cystoscopy, allowing 
immediate intervention, these are rarely done in isolation. However, contrast me-
dium is routinely used in cystoscopic placement of retrograde stents for obstruction.
Percutaneous nephrostomy. Used in obstruction to decompress the renal pelvis, 
which is punctured under local anaesthetic with imaging guidance. Images are ob-
tained following contrast injection (antegrade pyelogram). A nephrostomy tube is 
then placed to allow decompression, sometimes followed by an antegrade stent if 
there is no easily treatable cause of obstruction.
Renal arteriography (ﬁ g 16.37) Therapeutic indications: angioplasty; stenting; em-
bolization (bleeding tumour, trauma, AV malformation).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Soft tissue resolution can help clarify equivo-
cal  CT  ﬁ ndings.  Magnetic  resonance  angiography  (MRA)  helps  image  renal  artery 
anatomy/stenosis (ﬁ g 16.38) and is also used in the assessment of potential live do-
nors for kidney transplant, as well as to monitor patients following embolization of 
tumours, arteriovenous malformations, and aneurysms.
Radionuclide imaging See p738.

_OHCM_10e.indb   744

_OHCM_10e.indb   744

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

745

Fig  16.35  Ultrasound  of  the  kidney 
showing multiple simple cysts.

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.36  3D  reconstruction  of  CT  uro-
gram  showing  normal  appearances  of 
both kidneys, ureters, and bladder. 

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey.

Fig  16.37  Renal  artery  digital  subtrac-
tion angiogram (DSA; DSA is the ﬁ nal arbi-
ter of renal artery stenosis). It is possible 
to tell that this is a DSA as no other struc-
ture has any deﬁ nition or contrast in the 
image. There is, however, some interfer-
ence  from  overlying  bowel  gas,  which 
is  not  an  uncommon  problem.  GI  tract 
peristalsis can be diminished during the 
examination by using IV buscopan.

Fig 16.38  Coronal 3D MRA of the kidneys 
showing two renal arteries supplying the 
left  kidney.  This  is  important  informa-
tion  pre-transplant.  Anomalous  renal 
arteries are common and, like the normal 
renal  arteries,  are  end  arteries,  hence 
the consequence of infarction if tied at 
surgery.

_OHCM_10e.indb   745

_OHCM_10e.indb   745

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

746

Neuroimaging

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

CT (ﬁ g 16.39) Imaging modality of choice for patients presenting with acute neu-
rological symptoms suggestive of a stroke. It is better than MRI at showing acute 
haemorrhage and fractures, and is much easier to do in ill or anaesthetized patients, 
and so is good in emergencies. The attenuation of biological soft tissues is in a nar-
row range from about +80 for blood and muscle, to 0 for  CSF, and down to Ω100 
for fat (Hounsﬁ eld units, p730). IV contrast medium initially gives an angiographic 
eff ect, whitening the vessels. Later, if there is a defect in the blood–brain barrier 
(eg tumours or infection), contrast medium will opacify a lesion’s margins, giving 
enhancing white areas.
  • Some  CNS areas, eg pituitary gland, choroid plexus, have no blood–brain barrier 

and enhance normally.

  • Fresh blood is of higher attenuation (ie whiter) than brain tissue.
  • In old haematomas, Hb breaks down and loses attenuation, so a subacute subdural 

haematoma at 2wks may be of the same attenuation as adjacent brain.

  • A chronic subdural haematoma will be of relatively low attenuation.
CT is often used in acute stroke to exclude haemorrhage (eg pre-antiplatelets) and 
with perfusion scanning (ﬁ g 16.14) to aid management decisions regarding throm-
bolysis. The actual area of infarction/ischaemia may not show up for a day or so, and 
will be low-attenuation cytotoxic oedema (aff ecting both white and grey matter—
look for loss of grey matter deﬁ nition).
Tumours  and  abscesses  appear  similar,  eg  a  ring-enhancing  mass,  surrounding 
vasogenic oedema, and mass eff ect. Vasogenic oedema (from leaky capillaries) is 
extracellular and spreads through the white matter (grey matter spared). Mass ef-
fect causes compression of the sulci and ipsilateral ventricles, and may also cause 
herniation (subfalcine, transtentorial, or tonsillar). See p483 (and also ﬁ g 16.40).
Another indication for CT is acute, severe headache, eg suggestive of subarachnoid 
haemorrhage (p478). An unenhanced  CT may show fresh blood, hydrocephalus or 
ICP, any of which could make LP unsafe.
CT angiography gives excellent mapping of the cerebral circulation (ﬁ g 16.41), and 
can be done directly after unenhanced CT, looking for an aneurysm if the unenhanced 
CT shows subarachnoid haemorrhage.
MRI (MRI in stroke: ﬁ g 10.19, p481) The chief image sequences are:
  • T1-weighted images: Give good anatomical detail to which the T2 image can be 
compared. Fat is brightest (signal intensity); other tissues are darker to varying 
degrees. Flowing blood is low signal. Gadolinium contrast (p748) usually results in 
an increase in signal intensity. See  table 16.4.

  • T2-weighted images: These provide the best detection of most lesions as they usu-
ally contain some oedema or ﬂ uid and therefore appear white (eg ﬁ g 16.20, p735). 
Fat and ﬂ uid appear brightest. Flowing blood is again low signal.

Magnetic resonance angiography maps carotid, vertebrobasilar, and cerebral ar-
terial circulations (and sinuses, veins). Functional MRI can image local blood ﬂ ow.
Catheter angiography (ﬁ g 16.42) Less commonly used since the advent of MRA and 
CT angiography and perfusion techniques, though it has the advantage of allowing 
immediate therapy—eg coil embolization of saccular aneurysms.
Radionuclide imaging (p738)  PET is mostly used as a research tool in dementia, 
but perfusion scintigraphy scan be used in the assessment of Alzheimer’s disease, 
other dementias, and localizing epileptogenic foci. SPECT to visualize uptake of 123I-
FP-CIT (DaTSCAN™) can be used to assess reduced striatal dopaminergic transport in 
Parkinson’s disease.

_OHCM_10e.indb   746

_OHCM_10e.indb   746

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

747

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Fig  16.39  Unenhanced  axial  CT  head:  note 
the  old  infarct  in  the  left  middle  cerebral 
artery territory.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig 16.40  T1-weighted MRI of the brain show-
ing a haemangioblastoma in a patient with 
Von  Hippel–Lindau  syndrome  (p712).  Note 
enhancement with contrast medium.

Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey. 

Fig 16.41  A 3D reconstruction of a CT angio-
gram of the paired internal carotid arteries 
(yellow arrows) and their branches (anteri-
or cerebral arteries—green arrows, middle 
cerebral  arteries—red  arrows),  seen  from 
the front and slightly to the right. There is 
an aneurysm of the right middle cerebral 
artery (*).

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

Fig  16.42  Digital  subtraction  angiogram 
(DSA). The right internal carotid artery (yel-
low arrow), anterior cerebral artery (green 
arrow), and middle cerebral artery (red ar-
row) are shown.

Courtesy of Norwich Radiology Department.

_OHCM_10e.indb   747

_OHCM_10e.indb   747

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

748

Contrast media in imaging

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

The use of a contrast medium can alter the electron density of two previously similar 
tissues, thus allowing them to be distinguished. Contrast medium is usually admin-
istered by the following routes:
  • PO: Barium- or iodine-based agents for, eg swallow or enhancing visualization of 

bowel lumen on CT.

  • Inhaled: Technetium or xenon used in ventilation scintigraphy.
  • IV: (Most widespread clinical application.) Iodine or gadolinium.
  • PR: Air or CO2 can be introduced to the colon for CT colonography, iodinated con-

trast medium is used for water-soluble enemas.

Iodine-based contrast agents Iodine is used because of its relatively high elec-
tron  density  and  good  physiological  tolerance.  When  used  with  CT,  the  exami-
nation  is  said  to  be  contrast  enhanced—look  for  ‘+  c’  amongst  the  scan  details. 
Exercise  caution  in:  renal  or  cardiac  impairment;  myeloma;  diabetes;  sickle  cell 
disease; elderly; infants; the acutely unwell. Avoid iodine-based agents in active 
hyperthyroidism.
Have  renal  function  to  hand  in  these  patients  (see  p315).  Minor  reactions  in-
clude  nausea,  vomiting,  and  a  sensation  of  warmth.  More  severe  reactions  in-
clude  urticaria,  bronchospasm,  angioedema,  and  low  BP  (1:250);  theoretical  risk 
of death for 1:150 000.
Metformin should be withheld for 48h after IV contrast administration because 
of the risk of lactic acidosis.
Barium sulfate Used in examination of the GI tract. Water-insoluble particles of 
0.6–1.4μm  diameter  are  mixed  with  large  organic  molecules  such  as  pectin  and 
gum  to  promote  good  ﬂ ow,  mucosal  adherence,  and  high  density  in  thin  layers. 
Complications: Chemical pneumonitis or peritonitis. Never administer if you sus-
pect perforated viscus.
Water-soluble,  non-ionic,  iodine-based  contrast  agents  Used  instead  of 
barium  where  there  is  a  risk  of  peritoneal  contamination  (eg  ﬁ stula,  megacolon, 
ulceration,  diverticulitis,  bowel  anastomosis,  acute  intestinal  haemorrhage).  Gas-
trograffi  n should not be used.
Contains iodine so establish allergy history and thyroid status.
Air In CT colonography, air (or CO2) is insuffl  ated as a negative contrast medium 
after  barium  administration  to  enhance  mucosal  deﬁ nition.  Water  can  also  be 
used PO and PR to outline the lumen of the gut.
Gadolinium A lanthanide series element with paramagnetic qualities that is ad-
ministered intravenously (as gadolinium-DTPA) to enhance the contrast of certain 
structures  in  MRI.  It  works  by  reducing  the  time  to  relaxation  (TR)  of  hydrogen 
nuclei  in  its  proximity  and  appears  as  high  signal  on  T1-weighted  scans.  It  does 
not  cross  the  blood–brain  barrier  so  is  useful  in  enhancing  isointense  extra-axial 
tumours such as meningiomas. It can also highlight areas where the blood–brain 
barrier  has  broken  down  secondary  to  inﬂ ammatory  or  neoplastic  processes.  It 
is  renally  excreted:  check  eGFR:  if  signiﬁ cantly  reduced,  gadolinium  is  contrain-
dicated,  as  up  to  30%  may  develop  progressive  nephrogenic  systemic  ﬁ brosis/
nephrogenic  ﬁ brosing  dermopathy  which  causes  generalized  ﬁ brosis  which  im-
pairs movement and breathing—and which may be fatal. Aberrations in calcium-
phosphate metabolism and erythropoietin treatment seem to increase risk.  Other 
adverse reactions include headache, nausea, and local irritation at the site of in-
jection, with idiosyncratic reaction reported in less than 1%.

_OHCM_10e.indb   748

_OHCM_10e.indb   748

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

749

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
R

i

Imaging the acutely unwell patient
Asking yourself ‘Does this investigation need to be done right now?’ will often 
yield  the  answer  ‘No!’,  yet  there  are  a  few  occasions  when  early  imaging  can 
provide vital diagnostic information and inﬂ uence the prognosis for a patient:
  • Acute cauda equina syndrome (p466): MRI lumbar spine.
  • Suspected  thoracic  aorta  dissection  (p655):  CT  thorax  +  IV  contrast,  MRI  or 

transoesophageal echo (TOE). The mediastinum is rarely widened on CXR.

  • Suspected leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm (p654): CT aorta.
  • Acute kidney injury (p298): US of renal tract to exclude obstruction.
  • Acute pulmonary oedema: portable CXR: don’t delay to get an ideal ﬁ lm.
  • Acute abdomen with signs of peritonism: erect CXR to ﬁ nd intraperitoneal free 
gas (ﬁ g 13.26, p607; ≈ GI perforation). Remember: post-op there will be detectable 
gas (air/CO2) in the abdomen for ~10 days.  CT if suspicion of intra-abdominal 
source for sepsis or pathology requiring prompt surgery (eg appendicitis) . US 
for ectopic pregnancy.

  • Any patient with post-traumatic midline cervical spine tenderness—not just for 
the emergency department! Collar and backboard immobilization followed by 
a CT. All the vertebrae down to the top of T1 must be visualized and cleared before 
it is safe to take the collar off .

  • Sudden-onset focal neurology, worst-ever headache, deteriorating GCS: CT head, 

then LP if no evidence of ICP.

Remember that imaging—or re-imaging for a poor quality ﬁ lm—should never de-
lay the deﬁ nitive treatment of an emergency condition, eg:
  • Tension pneumothorax (p814 and ﬁ g 16.43): decompression not CXR.
  • Intra-abdominal haemorrhage or viscus rupture (p606): laparotomy.
  • High clinical suspicion of torsion of testis (p652): surgery not Doppler US.
Prior to the advent of interventional radiology, a collapsed, shocked patient with 
an acute abdomen would have skipped  CT and gone straight for a laparotomy.
However, you should bear in mind that ruptured aneurysms are increasingly being 
managed by endovascular repair under ﬂ uoroscopic guidance (p654) so this is one 
area where rapid imaging may be preferable to immediate intervention.

Fig 16.43  This is a great educational image from ICU. The inexperienced doctor could be dis-
tracted by the poor quality image, missing the lung bases: technicians do their best under dif-
ﬁ cult conditions. To ask for a new CXR here would be a mistake note the large right-sided 
tension pneumothorax needing immediate decompression! Lungs: The right lung ﬁ eld is too 
black compared to the left, the right hemidiaphragm is depressed, and the right lung is seen 
collapsed against the mediastinum. Mediastinum: Left-shifted, obstructing venous return—so 
cardiac output, and a threat to life. Is it being pushed or pulled? Check hila, bones, and soft tis-
sues. Since the right lung is collapsed and mediastinum shifted to left this suggests right ten-
sion pneumothorax. Needle thoracocentesis decompression and a chest drain are needed now.
Courtesy of Dr Edmund Godfrey. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   749

_OHCM_10e.indb   749

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

17  Reference intervals, etc.

Contents
Statistics in medicine  751
Biochemistry reference intervals  752
Haematology reference intervals  754
Drug therapeutic ranges in plasma  756
Some important drug interactions  757

Fig 17.1  Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) was 
a  German  astronomer  and  mathematician 
who  made  many  contributions  to  science, 
not least of which was establishing the nor-
mal (Gaussian) distribution (see p751). After 
his  death,  Gauss’s  brain  was  examined  by 
anatomist Rudolph Wagner, to test the popu-
lar theory that intellectual ability correlated 
with physical properties of the brain such as 
weight and surface markings. While his brain 
was  noted  to  display  an  unusually  intricate 
pattern  of  sulci,  lack  of  similarly  patterned 
sulci among the brains of other intellectuals 
cast doubts on the theory. Further lack of evi-
dence to support Wagner’s hypothesis came 
when  Gauss’  brain  was  weighed:  it  would 
perhaps have amused Gauss to learn that the 
weight of his brain, whilst slightly above aver-
age, lay very much within the central region 
of a Gaussian distribution. After some rather 
sloppy housekeeping, Gauss’ brain was stored 
in a mislabelled pot at the University in Göt-
tingen, accidentally switched with that of his 
contemporary,  the  physician  Conrad  Fuchs. 
Over 150 years later, some careful searching 
of  the  archives  and  a  MRI  scanner  revealed 
the switch.

_OHCM_10e.indb   750

_OHCM_10e.indb   750

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

Statistics in medicine 

  • The normal (Gaussian) distribution curve. This bell-shaped graph (ﬁ g 17.2) is the 
theoretical basis of reference intervals, and explains ‘lab error’—why some tests 
repeated at close intervals may reveal slightly diff erent values. Hb for example, 
has a lab error of ~5g/L. This emphasizes the importance of the clinical picture in 
decision-making, rather than treating the numbers alone: don’t subject anaemic 
patients to blood transfusions unless they have a clinical need. See p324.

  • Range is the lowest and highest value of all observations in the set being studied.
  • Arithmetic mean is the sum of all observations ÷ by the number of observations.
  • Median is the middle value (eg 9 data points are higher and 9 are lower). If their 

distribution is Normal, then the median coincides with the mean.

  • Standard deviation (SD) is the square root of the variance (the average of the 
square of the distance of each data point from the mean). When the distribution of 
the observations is Normal, 95% of observations are located in the interval ‘mean ± 
1.96 SD’. This is the basis of the reference interval.

  • Standard error of the mean gives an estimate of the reliability of the mean of a 
sample representing the mean of the population from which the sample was taken, 
and is the SD of the sample ÷ by the square root of the number of observations 
in the sample. Thus the larger the sample size, the smaller the standard error of 
the mean—the basis of ensuring that clinical trial evidence is based upon enough 
observations to be conﬁ dent that diff erences seen between groups do not occur 
by chance alone.

751

.

c
t
e

,
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Fig 17.2  Normal (Gaussian) distribution curve.

Reproduced from Bhopal, Concepts of Epidemiology, 2008, 
with permission from Oxford University Press.

_OHCM_10e.indb   751

_OHCM_10e.indb   751

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
752

Biochemistry reference intervals

.

c
t
e

,

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

See p662 for the philosophy of the normal range; see OHCS p220 for children.
Drugs (and other substances) may interfere with any chemical method; as these ef-
fects may be method dependent, it is diffi  cult for the clinician to be aware of all the 
possibilities. If in doubt, discuss with the lab.
Table 17.1

Your 
hospital

Substance

Specimen

Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Albumin1
Aldosterone2
Alkaline phosphatase1
-amylase
-fetoprotein
Angiotensin II2
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Aspartate transaminase
Bicarbonate1
Bilirubin
BNP (see p137)
C-reactive protein
Calcitonin
Calcium (ionized)
Calcium1 (total)
See p676 to correct for albumin
Chloride
Cholesterol3 (see p690)
  VLDL (see p690)
  LDL
  HDL
Cortisol

Creatine kinase (CK)

Creatinine1 (proportional to lean 
body mass)
Ferritin
Folate
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)

P
P
P
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P

P
P
P
P
P
P

P

P

P
S
P/S

Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase

P

P
Glucose (fasting)
P
Growth hormone
HbA1C = glycosylated Hb (DCCT)
B
HbA1C IFCC (more speciﬁ c than DCCT) B

Iron

Lactate

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
Lead
Luteinizing hormone (LH)

(premenopausal)

Magnesium
O smolality

S

P
ABG
P
B
P

P
P

Reference interval 
(labs vary, so a guide only)
<80ng/L
5–35U/L
35–50g/L
100–500pmol/L
30–130U/L (adults)
0–180IU/dL
<10kU/L
5–35pmol/L
0.9–4.6pmol/L
5–35U/L
24–30mmol/L
3–17μmol/L
<50ng/L
<10mg/L
<0 . 1mcg/L
1 . 0–1 . 25mmol/L
2.12–2.60mmol/L

95–105mmol/L
<5.0mmol/L
0.128–0.645mmol/L
<2.0mmol/L
0.9–1.93mmol/L
AM 450–700nmol/L
Midnight 80–280nmol/L
  25–195U/L
  25–170U/L
70–100μmol/L

12–200mcg/L
2 . 1mcg/L
2–8U/L in  (luteal);
>25U/L in menopause
  11–51U/L
  7–33U/L
3.5–5.5mmol/L
<20mu/L
4–6%. 7% ≈ good DM control
20–42mmol/mol; 53 ≈ good 
DM control
  14–31μmol/L
  11–30μmol/L
Venous 0.6–2.4mmol/L
Arterial 0.6–1.8mmol/L
70–250U/L
<1 . 8mmol/L
3–16U/L (luteal)

0.75–1.05mmol/L
278–305mosmol/kg

_OHCM_10e.indb   752

_OHCM_10e.indb   752

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Potassium
Prolactin

Prostate-speciﬁ c antigen (PSA)

Protein (total)
Red cell folate

Renin2 (erect/recumbent)

P
P
P

P

P
B

P

Sodium1
P
Thyroid-binding globulin (TBG)
P
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) P

Thyroxine (T4)
Thyroxine (free)
Total iron-binding capacity
Triglycerides (fasting)
Triiodothyronine (T3)
Troponin T (see p119)
Urate1

Urea1
Vitamin B12

P
P
S
P
P
P
P

P
S

<0.8–8.5pmol/L
3.5–5.3mmol/L
  <450U/L
  <600U/L
0–4mcg/mL, age speciﬁ c,
  see p530
60–80g/L
0.36–1 . 44μmol/L
(160–640mcg/L)
2.8–4.5/
1.1–2.7pmol/mL/h
135–145mmol/L
7–17mg/L
0.5–4.2mU/L 
widens with age, p216
assays vary; 4–5 is a grey area
70–140nmol/L
9–22pmol/L
54–75μmol/L
0.50–2.3mmol/L
1 . 2–3.0nmol/L
<0.1mcg/L
  210–480μmol/L
  150–390μmol/L
2.5–6.7mmol/L
0.13–0.68nmol/L 
(>150ng/L)
50nmol/L (total)

753

.

c
t
e

,
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

S

Vitamin D
P=plasma  (eg  citrate  bottle);  S=serum  (clotted;  no  anticoagulant);  B=whole  blood  (EDTA  bottle);
ABG=arterial blood gas).
1  See OHCS p9 for reference intervals in pregnancy.
2  The sample requires special handling: contact the laboratory.
3  Desired upper limit of cholesterol would be <6mmol/L. In some populations, 7.8mmol/L is the top 
end of the distribution.

Table 17.2
Arterial blood gases reference intervals
pH: 7.35–7.45
PaO2: >10.6kPa
Note: 7.6mmHg = 1kPa (atmospheric pressure ≈ 100kPa)

PaCO2: 4.7–6.0kPa
Base excess: ±2mmol/L

Your hospital

Table 17.3
Urine reference intervals
Cortisol (free)
Hydroxyindole acetic acid
Hydroxymethylmandelic acid
Metanephrines

Osmolality†
17-oxogenic steroids

17-oxosteroids (neutral)

Phosphate (inorganic)
Potassium
Protein
Protein
Sodium†
† Interpret based upon plasma values.

Reference interval
<280nmol/24h
16–73μmol/24h
16–48μmol/24h
0.03–0.69μmol/mmol 
creatinine (or <5.5μmol/day)
350–1000mosmol/kg
  28–30μmol/24h
  21–66μmol/24h
  17–76μmol/24h
  14–59μmol/24h
15–50mmol/24h
14–120mmol/24h
<150mg/24h
creatinine ratio <3mg/mmol
100–250mmol/24h

_OHCM_10e.indb   753

_OHCM_10e.indb   753

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
754

Haematolo gy reference intervals
Table 17.4  (For B12, folate, Fe, and TIBC, see pp752–3.)
Measurement
White cell count (WCC)
Red cell count

Your hospital

.

c
t
e

Haemoglobin

,

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Packed red cell volume (PCV)
  or haematocrit
Mean cell volume (MCV)
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH)
Mean cell haemoglobin
  concentration (MCHC)
Red cell distribution width 

(RCDW, RDW)

Neutrophils

Lymphocytes

Eosinophils

Basophils

Monocytes 

Platelet count 
Reticulocyte count
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
Prothrombin time (citrated bottle)

(factors I, II, VII, X) 

Activated partial thrombo- 
  plastin time (VIII, IX, XI, XII) 

Reference interval
4.0–11.0 ≈ 109/L
  4.5–6.5 ≈ 1012/L
  3.9–5.6 ≈ 1012/L
  130–180g/L
  115–160g/L
  0.4–0.54L/L
  0.37–0.47L/L
76–96fL
27–32pg
300–360g/L

11.6–14.6% (p325)

2.0–7.5 ≈ 109/L
40–75% WCC
1 . 0–4.5 ≈ 109/L
20–45% WCC
0.04–0.44 ≈ 109/L
1–6% WCC
0.0–0.10 ≈ 109/L
0–1% WCC
0.2–0.8 ≈ 109/L
2–10% WCC
150–400 ≈ 109/L
0.8–2.0%1 25–100 ≈ 109/L
  Depends on age (p372)

10–14s

35–45s

Therapeutic ranges for INR: see p351.
1  Only use percentages as reference interval if red cell count is normal; otherwise, use the absolute value.

_OHCM_10e.indb   754

_OHCM_10e.indb   754

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
755

.

c
t
e

,
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

_OHCM_10e.indb   755

_OHCM_10e.indb   755

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
756

Drug ther apeutic ranges in plasma

.

c
t
e

,

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Ranges should only be used as a guide to treatment. A drug in an apparently too 
low concentration may still be clinically useful, while some patients require (and 
tolerate) levels in the ‘toxic’ range.
The time since the last dose should be speciﬁ ed on the request form.
Amikacin.1 Peak (1h post IV dose): 20–30mg/L. Trough: <10mg/L.
Carbamazepine.1 Optimal concentration: 20–50μmol/L (4–12mg/L).
Digoxin1  (6–12h  post  dose)  1–2.6nmol/L  (0.8–2mcg/L).  <1.3nmol/L  may  be  toxic  if 
there is hypokalaemia. Signs of toxicity—CVS: arrhythmias, heart block. CNS: confu-
sion, insomnia, agitation, seeing too much yellow (xanthopsia), delirium. GI: nausea.
Gentamicin1,2  (p387)  and  tobramycin. 1,  2  The  potential  for  oto-  and  nephrotoxic-
ity is high if aminoglycosides are used inappropriately, so only prescribe for short 
therapeutic courses and follow local expert advice/guidelines. CI in severe renal or 
liver failure, ascites, burns, high cardiac output states (eg anaemia, Paget’s disease), 
children, and pregnancy. Signs of toxicity: tinnitus, deafness, nystag mus, vertigo, 
renal failure. Once-daily dosing with dose adjustment is prefered as this has fewer 
SES and better bactericidal activity (eg gentamicin 5mg/kg/d or tobramycin 4mg/
kg/d; check with pharmacist in obese patients or when using tobramycin in cystic 
ﬁ brosis). An exception to this dosing is endocarditis: split dosing (eg gentamicin 
1mg/kg/8h or 12-hourly in renal failure) increases the synergistic bactericidal eff ect 
of other agents. Trough (just before dose) levels and renal function should initially 
be monitored daily (can be twice weekly in stable patients with normal renal func-
tion)—aim for trough: <1mg/L for both gentamicin and tobramycin. If the trough 
level is out of range, withold the next dose until level <1mg/L (recheck after 12–24h).
Lithium2 (12h post dose). Guidelines vary: 0.4–0.8mmol/L is reasonable. Early signs 
of toxicity (Li+ >1.5mmol/L): tremor. Intermediate:  lethargy. Late: (Li+ >2mmol/L) 
spasms, coma, ﬁ ts, arrhythmias, renal failure (haemodialysis may be needed). See 
OHCS p349.
Phenytoin.1,2 Trough: 40–80μmol/L (10–20mg/L). Beware if albumin, as the assay is 
for bound phenytoin, while it is free pheny toin that is pharmacologically important. 
Signs of toxicity: ataxia, diplopia, nystagmus, sedation, dysarthria.
Theophylline  10–20mg/mL  (55–110μmol/L).  (See  p810.)  Take  sample  4–6h  after 
starting an infusion (which should be stopped for ~15min just before the specimen is 
taken). Signs of toxicity: arrhythmias, anxiety, tremor, convulsions.
Vancomycin.1,2 Renally excreted; dosing guided by age and renal function but typi-
cally 500mg–1g/12h. Check trough levels prior to 3rd dose, aiming for: 5–10 mg/L 
(10–15mg/L in SBE/IE and less-sensitive MRSA infections). If levels too low check drug 
being given then cautiously increase dose; if levels high then conﬁ rm timing of dose/
levels, omit next dose, recheck levels, and consider decreasing dose or frequency.

1  Trough levels should be taken just before the next dose. If values abnormally high, check that sample was 
indeed a trough level and not taken post-dose.
2  Drugs for which routine monitoring is indicated.

_OHCM_10e.indb   756

_OHCM_10e.indb   756

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
757

.

c
t
e

,
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Some important drug interactions

See BNF.
See p689 for a list of cytochrome P450 inducers and inhibitors. Note: ‘’ = eff ect of 
drug increased; ‘’ = eff ect decreased.
Drugs
Adenosine:  by: aminophylline.  by: dipyridamole.
Aminoglycosides:  by: loop diuretics.
Antidiabetic  drugs:  (All)    by:  alcohol,  -blockers,  bezaﬁ brate,  monoamine  oxi-
dase inhibi tors.  by: contraceptive steroids, corticosteroids, diazoxide, diuretics, 
(possibly also lithium).

  • Metformin  by: cimetidine. With alcohol: lactic acidosis risk.
  • Sulfonylureas   by: azapropazone, chloramphenicol, bezaﬁ brate, co-trimoxazole, 

miconazole, sulﬁ npyrazone.  by: rifampicin (nifedipine occasionally).

Antiretroviral agents (HIV): See p402.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors:  by: NSAIDS, oestrogens.
Antihistamines: Avoid anything that concentrations and risk of arrhythmias, eg 
anti-arrhythmics,  antifungals,  anti psychotics,  -blockers,  diuretics,  halofantrine, 
macrolide antibiotics (erythromycin, azithromycin, etc), protease inhibitors (p402), 
SSRIs (p448), tricyclics.

Azathioprine:  by: allopurinol.
-blockers: Avoid verapamil.  by: NSAIDS. Lipophilic -blockers (eg propranolol) are 
metabolized by the liver, and concentrations are  by cimetidine. This does not 
happen with hydrophilic -blockers (eg atenolol).

Carbamazepine:  by: erythromycin, isoniazid, verapamil.
Ciclosporin:  by: erythromycin, grapefruit juice, nifedipine.  by: phenytoin.
Cimetidine:    the  eff ect  of:  amitriptyline,  lidocaine,  metronidazole,  pethidine, 

phenytoin, propranolol, quinine, theophylline, warfarin.

Contraceptive steroids:  by: antibiotics, barbiturates, carbamazepine, phenytoin, 

rifampicin.

Digoxin:    by:  amiodarone,  carbenoxolone  and  diuretics  (due  to  K+),  quinine, 

verapamil.

Diuretics:  by: NSAIDS—particularly indometacin.
Ergotamine:  by: erythromycin (ergotism may occur).
Fluconazole: Avoid concurrent astemizole.
Lithium:  by: thiazide diuretics.
Methotrexate:  by: aspirin, NSAIDS. Many antibiotics (check BNF).
Phenytoin:    by:  chloramphenicol,  cimetidine,  disulﬁ ram,  isoniazid,  sulfonamides. 

 by: carbamazepine.

Potassium-sparing diuretics with ACE-inhibitors: Hyperkalaemia.
Theophyllines:  by: cimetidine, ciproﬂ oxacin, erythromycin, contraceptive steroids, 
propranolol.  by: barbiturates, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampicin. See p810.

Valproate:  by: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin.
Warfarin and nicoumalone: (Nicoumalone=acenocoumarol)  by: alcohol, allopu-
rinol, amiodar one, aspirin, chloramphenicol, cimetidine, ciproﬂ oxacin, co-trimox-
azole,  danazol,  dipyridamole,  disulﬁ ram,  erythromycin  (and  broad-spectrum 
antibiotics), gemﬁ brozil, glucagon, ketoconazole, metronidazole, miconazole, na-
lidixic acid, neomycin, NSAIDS, phenytoin, quinidine, simvastatin (but not pravasta-
tin), sulﬁ npyrazone, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, levothyroxine.

Warfarin and nicoumalone:  by: aminoglutethimide, barbiturates, carbamaz epine, 
contraceptive  steroids,  dichloralphenazone,  griseofulvin,  rifampicin,  phenytoin, 
vitamin K.

Zidovudine (AZT):  by: paracetamol (marrow toxicity).
IVI solutions to avoid
Glucose:  Avoid  furosemide,  ampicillin,  hydralazine,  insulin,  melphalan,  phenytoin, 

and quinine.

0.9% saline: Avoid amphotericin, lidocaine, nitroprusside.

_OHCM_10e.indb   757

_OHCM_10e.indb   757

02/05/2017   19:08

02/05/2017   19:08

 
 
18  Practical procedures

Contents
Nasogastric tubes  759
Placing IV cannulae  760
Cut down on to a vein  761
Catheterizing bladders  762
Draining ascites  764
Diagnostic aspiration of a pleural 

eff usion  765

Abdominal paracentesis  765
Inserting a chest drain  766
Relieving a tension pneumotho-

rax  767

Aspiration of a pneumothorax  767
Lumbar puncture (LP)  768
Cardioversion/deﬁ brillation  770
Arterial blood gas sampling  771
Emergency airway management  772
Central venous cannulation  774
Internal jugular catheterization  775
Inserting a temporary cardiac 

pacemaker  776

Fig 18.1  NHS ‘clean your hands’ campaign poster.
Contains public sector information licensed under Open 
Government Licence v3.0. https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/
request/21861/response/56086/attach/3/04072%20Hand%20

Hygiene%205%201.1.pdf
Hungarian obstetrician Ignaz Semmelweis demonstrated the beneﬁ ts of handwash-
ing in the 1840s: he observed that maternal mortality was nearly three times as high 
on a doctor-run maternity ward compared to a midwife-run ward. The explanation 
remained elusive until Semmelweis’ friend Jakob Kolletschka died after receiving an 
accidental scalpel cut from a student during a post-mortem demonstration. Sem-
melweis recognized in Kolletschka’s death many of the features of the dying moth-
ers. The explanation: the maternity ward doctors’ day started with post-mortem 
examinations, from which they would procede to perform vaginal examinations on 
the living without washing their hands. Noticing this, Semmelweis introduced the 
practice of washing hands with chloride of lime and cut death rates to that of the 
midwives’  patients.  Despite  the  evidence  he  amassed,  Semmelweis’s  theory  was 
rejected by his contemporaries, a rejection which undoubtedly contributed to his 
psychiatric distress, eventual commitment to an asylum, and ultimate death from 
the blows of his guards. It would take another 20 years and countless deaths before 
Lister published his landmark work on the use of carbolic acid in surgery.
Take a minute to wash your hands thoroughly before undertaking any procedure. This 
prerequisite will not only reduce infection risk for your patients, but give you a moment 
for mindfulness: focus on the hot water running over your hands, breathe deeply, and 
for a while forget about your list of jobs. Perhaps spare Dr Kolletschka a thought. You 
may ﬁ nd that the subsequent procedure goes more smoothly than anticipated.
Training and the business of medicine
As medical training has evolved in an environment where patient safety is para-
mount, the old adage of ‘see one, do one, teach one’ is no longer relevant. ‘Just having 
a go’ when you aren’t conﬁ dent can have devastating consequences for the patient, 
and also for you and your future. This creates tensions for training, but these are not 
insurmountable. Seek out opportunities to learn practical procedures, ideally in a 
controlled, elective setting, so that your ﬁ rst attempt isn’t a life-or-death emergency 
attempt—time spent in theatres or ICU will pay dividends in this regard. Many sen-
iors will be happy to make time to teach if you contact them in advance—let them 
know you are interested and leave your bleep. Even in an emergency setting, it is 
still wiser to seek help rather than attempting an urgent procedure for the ﬁ rst time.

We thank our Specialist Reader, Dr Andrew Johnston, for his contribution to this chapter.

_OHCM_10e.indb   758

_OHCM_10e.indb   758

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

759

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Nasogastric tubes
These tubes are passed into the stomach via the nose. Large (eg 16F) are good for 
drainage but can be uncomfortable for patients. Small (eg 10F) are more comfort-
able for feeding but can be diffi  cult to aspirate and are poor for drainage. Used:
  • To decompress the stomach/gastrointestinal tract especially when there is ob-

struction, eg gastric outﬂ ow obstruction, ileus, intestinal obstruction.

  • For gastric lavage.
  • To administer feed/drugs, especially in critically ill patients or those with dys-

phagia, eg motor neuron disease, post CVA.

Passing  the  tube  Nurses  are  experts  and  will  ask  you  (who  may  never  have 
passed one) to do so only when they fail—so the ﬁ rst question to ask is: ‘Have you 
asked the charge-nurse from the ward next door?’
  • Wear non-sterile gloves and an apron to protect both you and the patient.
  • Explain the procedure. Take a new, cool (hence less ﬂ exible) tube. Have a cup of 

water to hand. Lubricate well with aqueous gel.

  • Use the tube, by holding it against the patient’s head, to estimate the length 

required to get from the nostril to the back of the throat.

  • Place lubricated tube in nostril with its natural curve promoting passage down, 
rather than up. The right nostril is often easier than the left but, if feasible, ask 
the patient for their preference. Advance directly backwards (not upwards).
  • When the tip is estimated to be entering the throat, rotate the tube by ~180° to 

discourage passage into the mouth.

  • Ask the patient to swallow a sip of water, and advance as they do, timing each 

push with a swallow. If this fails: Try the other nostril.

  • The tube has distance markings along it: the stomach is at ~35–40cm in adults, so 
advance > this distance, preferably 10 –20cm beyond. Tape securely to the nose.
Conﬁ rming position This is vital prior to commencing any treatment through the 
tube. Misplaced nasogastric tubes have led to a number of preventable deaths, 
and feeding via a misplaced tube is considered an  NHS Never Event (a serious, 
largely preventable patient safety incident that should never occur if the available 
preventative measures have been implemented).
  • Use pH paper to test that you are in the stomach: aspirated gastric contents are 
acid (pH ≤5.5) although antacids or PPIS may increase the pH. Small tubes can be 
diffi  cult to aspirate, try withdrawing or advancing a few cm or turning the patient 
on the left side to help dip the tube in gastric contents. Aspirates should be >0.5mL 
and tested directly on unhandled pH paper. Allow 10s for colour change to occur.
  • If the pH is >5.5 and the NGT is needed for drug or feed administration then the 
position must be checked radiologically. Request a CXR/abdo X-ray (tell the radi-
ologist why you need it). Look for the radio-opaque line/tip (this can be hard to 
see, look below the diaphragm, but if in doubt, ask for help from the radiologist).

  • The ‘whoosh’ test is NOT an accepted method of testing for tube position.
  • Either spigot the tube, or allow to drain into a dependent catheter bag secured 
to clothing (zinc oxide tape around tube to form a ﬂ ap, safety pin through ﬂ ap).

Do not pass a tube nasally if there is any suspicion of a facial fracture.
Get senior help if the patient has recently had upper GI surgery—it is not good 
practice to push the tube through a fresh anastomosis.
Complications •Pain, or, rarely: •Loss of electrolytes •Oesophagitis •Tracheal or 
duodenal intubation •Necrosis: retro- or nasopharyngeal •Stomach perforation.
Weaning When planning removal of an NGT in situ for decompression or relief 
of obstruction, it is wise to wean it so that the patient manages well without it. 
Drainage should be <750mL/24 hours for successful weaning.
  • First it should be on free drainage with, eg, 4hrly aspirations.
  • Then spigot with 4hrly aspirations.
  • Then spigot only. If this is tolerated along with oral intake then it is probably safe 

to remove the tube; if not, then take a step backwards.

_OHCM_10e.indb   759

_OHCM_10e.indb   759

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
760

Placing IV cannulae

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Much  of  what  we  do  is  not  evidence  based;  however,  in  more  recent  years, 
particularly  in  intensive  care  units,  the  rise  of  hospital-acquired  infections  and 
multidrug-resistant organisms has prompted a review of standard practice and 
a series of evidence-based interventions put together as a ‘care bundle’ to reduce 
hospital-acquired infections. The technique for placing a cannula is best shown at 
the bedside by an expert, but following these simple rules will signiﬁ cantly reduce 
the risk of infection from the cannula.
Preparation is key, remember the following before you start

1      Equipment: Set up a tray with cleaning swabs, gauze, cannulae (swallow your 
pride and take at least three of diff erent sizes, see table 18.1), dressings, 0.9% sa-
line, 10mL syringe, needle-free adaptor (eg octopus with bionector), blood tubes 
if required, portable sharps bin  needlestick injuries do happen.

2      Patient: Have them lying down, explain procedure, obtain verbal consent, place 

tourniquet around arm, rest the arm below the heart to aid venous ﬁ lling.

3      Site: Look for the best vein—it should be palpable; some of the best veins are not 
easily visible, some of the most visible collapse on insertion. Tapping gently helps. 
Never cannulate: AV ﬁ stulae arms, limbs with lymphoedema. Avoid: Sites 
crossing a joint (if possible), the cephalic vein in a renal patient.

4      Consider: EMLA® cream, cold spray, or 1% lidocaine for children or those with 

needle phobia. EMLA® takes 45min to work, but can save you hassle later.

Insertion care bundle
1 Aseptic technique. 2 Hand hygiene. 3 Apron + non-sterile gloves. 4 Skin prepara-
tion—2% chorhexidine in 70% isopropyl alcohol (allow to dry for 30 seconds). Do not 
repalpate vein after cleaning unless wearing sterile gloves. 5 Dressing—sterile and 
transparent so that insertion site can be observed.
After insertion
1 Take blood with syringe or adaptor. 2 Remove tourniquet. 3 Attach needle-free de-
vice (if appropriate) and ﬂ ush with 10mL 0.9% saline. 4 Apply dressing. 5 Let nursing 
staff  know that cannula is in place and ready for use. 6 Document insertion according 
to local policy. 7 Write up appropriate ﬂ uids or parenteral medication.
When seeing your patient on the daily ward round (and to avoid being called to 
review or replace cannulae at 6pm) do a RAID1 assessment: consider if the drip is:
Required—can the patient manage with oral medication/ﬂ uids?
Appropriate—should you consider a PICC, central line, long-term line, etc?
Infected—any signs of inﬂ ammation or infection? Remove if yes. Peripheral cannulae 
should be replaced every 72–96 hours.
Dressed properly—many drips are replaced early because they have ‘fallen out’, or 
are kinked from poor dressings.
Tissued or infected cannulae need replacing, either with another peripheral cannula, 
or with a longer-term access device, such as a PICC line.
If  you  fail  after  three  attempts  Shocked  patients  need  ﬂ uid  quickly:  if  you 
are having trouble putting in a drip, call your senior. The following advice assumes 
that the drip is not immediately life-saving. If it is, see BOX.
  • Ask  for  help—from  colleagues  or  seniors—do  not  be  ashamed,  everyone  has  to 
learn and even senior doctors have bad days; a fresh pair of eyes can be all it takes. 
As a house offi  cer, one of us was asked to place a drip when a very shame-faced 
consultant had ‘had a go’ to prove he still could, and found out that he couldn’t!
  • Help yourself—try putting the hand in warm water, using a small amount of GTN 
paste over the vein, or using ultrasound if available to help you identify the vein.
  • If there is no one else to help, take a break and come back in half an hour. Veins 

come and go, and coming back with fresh eyes can make all the diff erence.

_OHCM_10e.indb   760

_OHCM_10e.indb   760

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
761

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Table 18.1  Intravenous cannulae sizes and UK colour conventions

Gauge Colour

14G

16G

18G

20G

22G

24G

ORANGE/BROWN

GREY

GREEN

PINK

BLUE

YELLOW

Diameter 
(mm)
2 . 0
1 . 7
1 . 2
1 . 0
0 . 28
0 . 07

Length 
(mm)
45
42
40
32
25
19

Flow rate 
(mL/min)
250
170
90
55
25
24

Flow rate is given as maximum ﬂ ow rate under gravity; faster rates may be achievable with rapid infusion devices.
According to Poiseuille’s law1 the ﬂ ow rate (Q) of a ﬂ uid through a tubular structure is inversely proportional 
to viscosity (η) and length (l ) and proportional to the pressure diff erence across it (Pi Ω Po) and the radius 
to the power of 4(r 4). Hence:

Q  ∝ 

(Pi Ω Po) r 4
η l

A last throw of the dice
Just once it may come down to you. For some, this is one of the challenges and 
thrills in medicine. There may be no one else available to help when there is an 
absolute and urgent indication for IV drugs/ﬂ uids/blood—and all of the previously 
discussed  measures  have  been  tried,  and  have  failed.  Think  of  lonesome  night 
shifts,  over-run  emergency  departments,  a  disaster  scene,  war,  or  medicine  in 
the ﬁ eld. The following measures are not recommended for non-life-threatening 
scenarios:
 Don’t worry. Have a good look again. Feet (avoid in diabetics)? Inside of the 

forearm? Upper arm?

 Have you really exhausted all of your options for help from a colleague? Maybe 
the anaesthetist or ICU registrar is approachable—they do have remarkable skills.

 Is the patient familiar with his/her own veins (eg previous IV drug abuser)?
 If there is only a small amount of IV medication required and a small, short vein, 
you may be able to gain access with a carefully placed butterﬂ y needle that is 
taped down. Some drugs cannot be passed this way (eg amiodarone, K+).

 The external jugular vein may become prominent when the patient is head down 
(Trendelenburg) by 5–10° (not in situations of ﬂ uid overload, LVF, ICP). Only at-
tempt cannulation of this vein if you are not going to jeopardize future central 
line insertion, and if you can clearly determine the surrounding anatomy.

 In an arrest situation, the 2015 Advanced Life Support Guidelines recommend 
the intraosseous route in both adults and children if venous access is not pos-
sible; access devices should be available within resuscitation settings (eg emer-
gency department).

Only do the following if you have had the appropriate training/experience:
 In children, consider cannulating a scalp vein.
 Central venous catheterization (p775). This may be just as hard in a profoundly 
hypovolaemic arrest patient, and a good knowledge of local anatomy and of the 
procedure (± ultrasound guidance) will be invaluable.

If you don’t have an intraosseous access device, a cut down to the long saphen-
ous vein may be attempted, in extremis, even if you have no prior experience (at 
this site you won’t kill by being ham-ﬁ sted).  Make a transverse incision 1–2cm 
anterior and superior to the medial malleolus. Free vein with forceps. Cannulate 
it under direct vision. Here, ‘ﬁ rst do no harm’ is trumped by ‘nothing ventured, 
nothing gained’.
Hopefully, it shouldn’t ever have to come to these measures, but one day…

1  Poiseuille’s law is a neat piece of physiology and worth remembering—it is applicable in some form to 
almost every system in the body. Note that it is a 4th-power law: a small change in the radius makes a huge 
diff erence to ﬂ ow.

_OHCM_10e.indb   761

_OHCM_10e.indb   761

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
 
 
762

Catheterizing bladders

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Urinary tract infections are the second commonest health care-associated infection, 
and urinary catheters are frequently to blame. Think, does the patient really need a 
catheter? If so, use the smallest you can and take out as soon as possible.
Size (in French gauge): 12=small; 16=large; 20=very large (eg 3-way). Material Coat-
ed latex catheters are soft and a good short-term option but unsuitable in true 
latex allergy. Silastic (silicone) catheters may be used long term, but cost more. Sil-
ver alloy coating reduces infections. Shape Foley is typical (ﬁ g 18.2); coudé (elbow) 
catheters have an angled tip to ease around prostates but are more risky; 3-way 
catheters are used in clot or debris retention and have an extra lumen for irrigation 
ﬂ uid, attached to the irrigation set via an extra port on the distal end (ﬁ g 18.3). Get 
urology advice before starting irrigation. Condom catheters are often preferred by 
patients (less discomfort) even though they may leak and fall off .
Catheter problems • Infection: ~5% develop bacteraemia (most will have bacte-
rial colonization, antibiotics may not be required unless systemically unwell—discuss 
with microbiology). A stat dose of, eg gentamicin 80mg is sometimes given pre-
insertion despite a lack of evidence for beneﬁ t. Check your local policy. • Bladder 
spasm: May be painful—try reducing the water in the balloon or an anticholinergic 
drug, eg oxybutynin.
Per urethram Aseptic technique required.
Indications  • Relieve  urinary  retention.  • Monitor  urine  output  in  critically  ill  pa-
tients. • Collect uncontaminated urine for diagnosis.  It is contraindicated in ure-
thral injury (eg pelvic fracture) and acute prostatitis.
  • Explain the procedure, and obtain verbal consent. Prepare a catheterization trolley: 
gloves, catheter, lidocaine jelly, cleaning solution, drape, kidney dish, gauze swabs, 
drainage bag, 10mL water and syringe, specimen container.

  • Lie the patient supine: women with knees ﬂ exed and hips abducted with heels to-
gether. Use a gloved hand to clean urethral meatus in a pubis-to-anus direction, hold-
ing the labia apart with the other hand. With uncircumcised men, retract the foreskin 
to clean the glans; use a gloved hand to hold the penis still. The hand used to hold 
the penis or labia should not touch the catheter. Place a sterile drape with a hole in 
the middle to help you maintain asepsis. Remember: left hand dirty, right hand clean.
  • Put sterile lidocaine 1–2% gel on the catheter tip and ≤10mL into the urethra (≤5mL 
if ). In men, lift and gently stretch the penis upwards to eliminate any urethral 
folds that may lead to false passage formation.

  • Use steady gentle pressure to advance the catheter, rotating slightly can help it 
slide in. Never force the catheter. Tilting the penis up towards the umbilicus while 
inserting may help negotiate the prostate. Insert to the hilt; wait until urine emerg-
es before inﬂ ating the balloon. Remember to check the balloon’s capacity before in-
ﬂ ation (written on the outer end). Collect a sterile specimen and attach a drainage 
bag. Pull the catheter back so that the balloon comes to rest at the bladder neck.
  • If you are having trouble getting past the prostate, try: more lubrication, a gentle 
twisting motion; a larger catheter; or call the urologists, who may use a guidewire.
Remember to reposition the foreskin in uncircumcised men after the catheter is 
inserted to prevent oedema of the glans and paraphimos.
Documentation: In the notes be sure to document the indication for catheterization, 
size of catheter, whether insertion was diffi  cult or straightforward, any complica-
tions, residual volume and colour of urine. It is good practice to document that the 
foreskin has been replaced. Sign with your name, date, and designation.
Suprapubic catheterization: Sterile technique required Absolutely contraindi-
cated unless there is a large bladder palpable or visible on ultrasound, because of the 
risk of bowel perforation. Be wary, particularly if there is a history of abdominal or 
pelvic surgery. Suprapubic catheter insertion is high risk and you should be trained 
before attempting it, speak to the urologists ﬁ rst.

_OHCM_10e.indb   762

_OHCM_10e.indb   762

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
Self-catheterization
This is a good, safe way of managing chronic retention from a neuropathic bladder 
(eg in multiple sclerosis, diabetic neuropathy, spinal tumour, or trauma). Never 
consider a patient in diffi  culties from a big residual volume to be too old, young, 
or disabled to learn. 5-yr-old children can learn the technique, and can have their 
lives transformed—so motivation may be excellent. There may be fewer UTIs as 
there is no residual urine—and less reﬂ ux obstructive uropathy. Assessing suit-
ability entails testing sacral dermatomes: a ‘numb bum’ implies sensation of a 
full bladder; higher sensory loss may mean catheterization will be painless. Get 
help from your continence adviser who will be in a position to teach the patient 
or carer that catheterizations must be gentle (the catheter is of a much smaller 
calibre), particularly if sensation is lacking, and must number >4/d (‘always keep 
your catheter with you; don’t wait for an urge before catheterizing’). See ﬁ g 18.4.

763

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Fig 18.2  A size 14F latex Foley 
catheter  with  the  balloon  inf-
l ated  via  the  topmost  port  of 
the outer end (green).
© Dr Tom Turmezei (not to scale).

Fig  18.3   The  external  end  of 
a size 20F 3-way catheter. The 
lowest port is for the bladder 
irrigation ﬂ uid and the upper-
most  port  (yellow)  is  for  bal-
loon inﬂ ation. 
© Dr Tom Turmezei (not to scale).

smaller 

Fig  18.4  A  size  10F  catheter 
for  self-catheterization.  They 
are  usually 
than 
indwell ing  catheters,  eg  10F 
comp ared to 14F. Note that this 
catheter also has no balloon.
© Dr Tom Turmezei (not to scale).

‘The catheter is not draining…’
You will be asked to check catheters that are not draining. Check the ﬂ uid chart 
and the patient:
  • Previously good output, now anuric: Blocked catheter until proven otherwise. 
Was the urine clear previously or bloodstained? Consider ﬂ ushing the catheter: 
with aseptic technique ﬂ ush and withdraw 20mL of sterile 0.9% saline with a 
bladder syringe. This may get the ﬂ ow going again. A 3-way catheter may be 
needed if there is clot or debris retention. If it blocks again, replace it. Repeated 
ﬂ ushes lead to infection.

  •  Slow decline in urine output over several hours: In a dehydrated/post-op pa-
tient a ﬂ uid challenge of 500mL STAT (250mL if cardiac comorbidity) may help, 
come back and check the response in 30min. Check all other parameters (eg 
pulse, BP, CVP) and increase rate of background IV ﬂ uids if appropriate.
Acute kidney injury (p298): if urine output has tailed off  and now stopped, the 
cause is often renal hypoperfusion (ie pre-renal failure), but consider other fac-
tors, eg nephrotoxic drugs.

  •  Catheter is bypassing: A condom catheter may be more appropriate.
  •  Catheter has dislodged into the proximal (prostatic) urethra: Possible even 
if the balloon is fully inﬂ ated. Consider this if a ﬂ ush enters but cannot be with-
drawn. If the patient still needs a catheter then replace it, consider a larger size.
  • The catheter has perforated the lower urinary tract on insertion and is not 
lying in the bladder or urethra: If suspected, call the urologists immediately.

Remember: urine output should be >400mL in 24h or >0.5mL/kg/h (see p576).

Trial without catheter (TWOC)
When it is time to remove a catheter, the possibility of urinary retention must be 
considered. Remove the catheter ﬁ rst thing one morning. If retention does occur, 
insert a long-term catheter (eg silicone), consider an -blocker (p642), and arrange 
urology TWOC clinic follow-up. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   763

_OHCM_10e.indb   763

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
764

Draining ascites

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

For patients with refractory or recurrent ascites that is symptomatic, it is possible to 
drain the ascites using a long pig-tail catheter. Paracentesis in such patients even in 
the presence of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis may be safe. Learn at the bedside 
from an expert.
Contraindications  (these  are  relative,  not  absolute)  End-stage  cirrhosis;  co-
agulopathy;  hyponatraemia  (126mmol/L);  sepsis.  The  main  complication  of  the 
procedure is severe hypovolaemia secondary to reaccumulation of the ascites, so 
intravascular replenishment with a plasma expander is required. For smaller vol-
umes, eg less than 5L, 500mL of 5% human albumin or Gelofusine® would be suf-
ﬁ cient. For volumes over 5L, reasonable replacement would be 100mL 20% human 
albumin IV for each 1–3 litres of ascites drained (check your local policy). You may 
need to call the haematology lab to request this in advance.
Procedure Requires sterile technique.
  • Ensure you have good IV access—eg 18G cannula in the antecubital fossa.
  • Explain  the  procedure  including  the  risks  of  infection,  bleeding,  hyponatraemia, 
renal impairment, and damage to surrounding structures (such as liver, spleen, 
and bowel), and obtain consent from the patient. Serious complications occur in 
less than 1 in 1000 patients. Ask the patient to empty their bladder.

  • Examine  the  abdomen  carefully,  evaluating  the  ascites  and  checking  for  orga-
nomegaly. Mark where you are going to enter. If in doubt, ask the radiology de-
partment  to  ultrasound  the  abdomen  and  mark  a  spot  for  drainage.  Approach 
from the left side unless previous local surgery/stoma prevents this—call a senior 
for support and advice if this is the case.

  • Prepare  a  tray  with  2%  chlorhexidine  solution,  sterile  drapes,  1%  lidocaine,  sy-
ringes,  needles,  sample  bottles,  and  your  drain.  Clean  the  abdomen  thoroughly 
and place sterile drapes, ensure you maintain sterile technique throughout. Inﬁ l-
trate the local anaesthetic.

  • Perform an ascitic tap (see p765) ﬁ rst so that you know you are in the correct 

place: remove 20mL ﬂ uid for MC&S.

  • Away from the patient, carefully thread the catheter over the (large and long) 
needle  using  the  guide  so  that  the  pig-tail  has  been  straightened  out.  Remove 
the guide.

  • With the left hand hold the needle ~2.5cm (1 inch) from the tip—this will stop it 
from advancing too far (and from performing an aortic biopsy). With the right 
hand, hold the other end.

  • Gently insert the needle perpendicular to the skin at the site of the ascitic tap up 
to your hold with your left hand—ascites should now drain easily. If necessary, 
advance the needle and catheter a short distance until good ﬂ ow is achieved.

  • Advance the catheter over the needle with your left hand, keeping the needle in 
exactly the same place with your right hand. Do not re-advance the needle be-
cause it will go through the curled pig-tail and do not withdraw it because you 
won’t be able to thread in the catheter.

  • When fully inserted, remove the needle, connect the catheter to a drainage bag 
(keep it below the level of the abdomen), and tape it down securely to the skin.

  • The patient should stay in bed as the ascites drains.
  • Document clearly in the notes the indication for the procedure, that consent was 
obtained, clotting and U&ES checked pre-procedure, how much lidocaine was re-
quired, how much ﬂ uid was removed for investigations, and whether there were 
any complications to the procedure.

  • Replenish intravascular volume with human albumin (see ‘Contraindications’ ear-

lier in topic).

  • Ask the nursing staff  to remove the catheter after 6h or after a pre-determined 
volume has been drained (up to 20L can come off  in 6h) and document this clear-
ly in the medical notes. Drains are removed after 4–6h to prevent infection.

  • Check U&ES after the procedure and re-examine the patient.

_OHCM_10e.indb   764

_OHCM_10e.indb   764

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
765

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Diagnostic taps
If you are unsure whether a drain is needed, a 
diagnostic tap can be helpful. Whatever ﬂ uid you 
are sampling, a green needle carries far less risk 
than a formal drain. It also allows you to decide 
whether a drain is required.

Ascites may be sampled to give a cytological 
or bacterial diagnosis, eg to exclude spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis (SBP; p276). Before starting, 
know the patient’s platelets + clotting times. If 
they are abnormal, seek help before proceeding.
  • Place  the  patient  ﬂ at  and  tap  out  the  ascites, 
marking a point where ﬂ uid has been identiﬁ ed, 
avoiding vessels, stomas, and scars (adhesions to 
the anterior abdominal wall). The left side may 
be safer—less chance of nicking liver (ﬁ g 18.5).
  • Clean  the  skin.  Inﬁ ltrate  some  local  anaes-

thetic, eg 1% lidocaine (see p573).

  • Insert a 21G needle on a 20mL syringe into the 
skin and advance while aspirating until ﬂ uid is 
withdrawn, try to obtain 60mL of ﬂ uid.

Fig 18.5  Always tap out the ascites, 
but aim approximately for 5cm me-
dial  to  and  superior  to  the  anterior 
superior iliac spine. If in doubt, ask 
for an ultrasound to mark the spot.

  • Remove the needle, apply a sterile dressing.
  • Send  ﬂ uid  to  microbiology  (15mL)  for  microscopy  and  culture,  biochemistry 
(5mL for protein, see p192), and cytology (40mL). Call microbiology to forewarn 
them if urgent analysis of the specimen is required.

Diagnostic aspiration of a pleural eff  usion
  • If not yet done, a CXR may help evaluate the side and size of the eff usion.
  • Ideally use  US guidance at the bedside ( chance of successful aspirate and  
chance  of  organ  puncture).  If  this  is  unavailable,  ask  an  ultrasonographer  to 
mark a spot, or percuss the upper border of the pleural eff usion and choose a site 
1 or 2 intercostal spaces below it (usually posteriorly or laterally).

  • Clean the area around the marked spot with 2% chlorhexidine solution.
  • Inﬁ ltrate down to the pleura with 5–10mL of 1% lidocaine.
  • Attach a 21G needle to a syringe and insert it just above the upper border of the 
rib below the mark to avoid the neurovascular bundle (ﬁ g 18.6). Aspirate whilst 
advancing the needle. Draw off  10–30mL of pleural ﬂ uid. Send ﬂ uid to the lab 
for chemistry (protein, glucose, pH, LDH); bacteriology (microscopy and culture, 
auramine stain, TB culture); cytology, and, if indicated, amylase and immunology 
(rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, complement).

If you cannot obtain ﬂ uid with a 21G needle, seek help.
  • If any cause for concern, arrange a repeat CXR.

Fig 18.6  Safe approach to entering the pleura by the intercostal route.

_OHCM_10e.indb   765

_OHCM_10e.indb   765

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
766

Inserting a chest drain

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Indications
  • Pneumothorax (p814): ventilated; tension; persistent/recurrent despite aspiration 
(eg <24h after 1st aspiration); large 2nd spontaneous pneumothorax if >50yrs old.

  • Malignant pleural eff usion, empyema, or complicated parapneumonic eff usion.
  • Pleural eff usion compromising ventilation, eg in ICU patients.
  • Traumatic haemopneumothorax.
  • Post-operatively: eg thoracotomy; oesophagectomy; cardiothoracic surgery.
Pleural  eff usions  are  best  drained  under  US  guidance  using  a  Seldinger  tech-
nique.  This  technique  is  also  used  for  pneumathoraces  (except  in  traumatic  or 
post-operative situations) without US guidance; for this reason it is detailed here.
Sterile procedure
  • Identify  the  point  for  drainage.  In  eff usions,  this  should  be  done  with  US,  ideally 
under  direct  guidance  or  with  a  marked  spot.  For  pneumothoraces,  check  the 
drainage point from CXR/CT/examination.

  • Preparation: trolley with dressing pack; 2% chlorhexidine; needles; 10mL syring-
es; 1% lidocaine; scalpel; suture; Seldinger chest drain kit; underwater drainage 
bottle; connection tubes; sterile H2O; dressings. Incontinence pad under patient.
  • Choose insertion site: 4–6th intercostal space, anterior- to mid-axillary line—the 
‘safe triangle’ (see BOX ‘The “safe triangle” for insertion’ and ﬁ g 18.7). A more pos-
terior  approach,  eg  the  7th  space  posteriorly,  may  be  required  to  drain  a  locu-
lated eff usion (under direct US visualization) and occasionally the 2nd intercostal 
space  in  the  mid-clavicular  line  may  be  used  for  apical  pneumothoraces—how-
ever, both approaches tend to be less comfortable.

  • Maintain sterile technique—clean and place sterile drapes. Scrub for insertion.
  • Prepare your underwater drain by ﬁ lling the bottle to the marked line with ster-

ile water. Ensure this is kept sterile until you need it.

  • Inﬁ ltrate down to pleura with 10mL of 1% lidocaine and a 21G needle. Check that 
air/ﬂ uid can be aspirated from the proposed insertion site; if not, do not proceed.
  • Attach the Seldinger needle to the syringe containing 1–2mL of sterile saline. The 
needle is bevelled and will direct the guidewire; in general advance bevel up for 
pneumothoraces, bevel down for eff usions.

  • Insert the needle gently, aspirating constantly. When ﬂ uid/air is obtained in the 
syringe,  stop,  note  insertion  depth  from  the  markings  on  the  Seldinger  needle. 
Remove  syringe,  thread  the  guidewire  through  the  needle.  Remove  the  needle 
and clamp the guidewire to the sterile drapes to ensure it does not move. Using 
the markings on the Seldinger needle, move the rubber stops on the dilators to 
the depth noted earlier, to prevent the dilator slipping in further than intended.
  • Make a nick in the skin where the wire enters, and slide the dilators over the wire 
sequentially from smallest to largest to enlarge the hole, keep gauze on hand. Slide 
the  Seldinger  drain  over  the  wire  into  the  pleural  cavity.  Remove  the  wire  and 
attach a 3-way tap to the drain, then connect to the underwater drainage bottle.
  • Suture the drain in place using a drain stitch—make a stitch in the skin close to the 
drain site, tie this fairly loosely with a double knot. Then tie the suture to the drain. 
It is usually best to be shown this before attempting it for yourself. Dress the drain, 
and ensure it is well taped down.

  • Check that the drain is swinging (eff usion) or bubbling (pneumothorax) and ensure 
the water bottle remains below the level of the patient at all times. If the drain 
needs to be lifted above the patient, clamp it brieﬂ y. You should never clamp 
chest drains inserted for pneumothoraces. Clamping for pleural eff usions can con-
trol the rate of drainage and prevent expansion pulmonary oedema. 

  • Request a CXR to check the position of the drain.
Removal In  pneumothorax:  Consider when drain is no longer bubbling and  CXR 
shows re-inﬂ ation. Give analgesia beforehand, eg morphine. Smartly withdraw dur-
ing expiration or Valsalva. There is no need to clamp the drain beforehand as reinser-
tion is unlikely. In effusions: Generally the drain can be removed when drainage is 
<200mL/24h, but for cirrhotic hydrothoraces the chest drain is treated similarly to 
the ascitic drain (see p764) with HAS supplementation and removal at 4–6 hours.

_OHCM_10e.indb   766

_OHCM_10e.indb   766

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
767

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

The ‘safe triangle’ for insertion of a chest drain

Fig  18.7  The  safe  ‘triangle’  is  not  re-
ally a triangle, as the axilla cuts off  the 
point of the triangle. Draw a line along 
the lateral border of pectoralis major, a 
line along the anterior border of latis-
simus dorsi, and a line superior to the 
horizontal level of the nipple. The apex 
of the triangle is the axilla. Often chest 
drains are inserted directly under ultra-
sound guidance, or with a pre-marked 
spot; however, in an emergency or for 
aspiration,  the  landmarks  of  the  safe 
triangle are important to know.

Complications
  • Thoracic or abdominal organ injury. • Lymphatic damage  chylothorax.
  • Damage to long thoracic nerve of Bell  wing scapula. • Rarely, arrhythmia.
Watch out for:
  • Retrograde ﬂ ow back into the chest.
  • Persistent bubbling—there may be a continual leak from the lung.
  • Blockage of the tube from clots or kinking—no swinging or bubbling.
  • Malposition—check position with CXR.

Relieving a tension pneumothorax
Symptoms Acute respiratory distress, chest pain, respiratory arrest.
Signs Hypotension; distended neck veins; asymmetrical lung expansion; trachea 
and apex deviated away from side of reduced air entry and hyperresonance to 
percussion. There is no time for a CXR (but see ﬁ g 16.43, p749).
Aim To release air from the pleural space. In a tension pneumothorax, air is drawn 
into the intrapleural space with each breath, but cannot escape due to a valve-like 
eff ect of the tiny ﬂ ap in the parietal pleura. The increasing pressure progressively 
embarrasses the heart and the other lung.
100% oxygen.
Prodedure
  • Insert  a  large-bore  IV  cannula  (eg  Venﬂ on®)  usually  through  the  2nd  intercostal 
space in the midclavicular line or the ‘safe triangle’ for chest drain insertion (see BOX 
‘The “safe triangle” for insertion’). Remove the stylet, allowing the trapped air to es-
cape, usually with an audible hiss. This converts the tension pneumothorax to an open 
pneumothorax. Tape securely. • Don’t recover the cannula as tensioning will recur.

  • Proceed to formal chest drain insertion (see p766).

Aspiration of a pneumothorax 
Identify the 2nd intercostal space in the midclavicular line (or 4–6th intercostal 
space in the midaxillary line) and inﬁ ltrate with 1% lidocaine down to the pleura 
overlying the pneumothorax.
  • Insert a 16G cannula into the pleural space. Remove the needle and connect the 
 cannula to a 3-way tap and a 50mL syringe. Aspirate up to 2.5L of air (50mL≈50). 
Stop if resistance is felt, or if the patient coughs excessively.

  • Request a CXR to conﬁ rm resolution of the pneumothorax. If successful, consider 
discharging the patient and repeating the CXR after 24h to exclude recurrence, 
and again after 7–10d. Advise to avoid air travel for 6 weeks after a normal CXR. 
Diving should be permanently avoided.

  • If aspiration is unsuccessful (in a signiﬁ cant, symptomatic pneumothorax), insert 

an intercostal drain (see p766).

_OHCM_10e.indb   767

_OHCM_10e.indb   767

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
768

Lumbar puncture (LP)

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Contraindications •Bleeding diathesis. •Cardiorespiratory compromise. •Infection 
at site of needle insertion. Most importantly:  ICP (suspect if very severe headache, 
level of consciousness with falling pulse, rising BP, vomiting, focal neurology, or pap-
illoedema)—LP in these patients will cause coning, so unless it is a routine procedure, 
eg for known idiopathic intracranial hypertension, obtain a CT prior to LP. CT is not 
infallible, so be sure your indication for LP is strong.
Method Explain to the patient what sampling CSF entails, why it is needed, that co-
operation is vital, and that they can communicate with you at all stages.
  • Place the patient on his or her left side, with the back on the edge of the bed, fully 
ﬂ exed (knees to chin). A pillow under the head and another between the knees may 
keep them more stable.

  • Landmarks: plane of iliac crests through the level of L 3/4 (see ﬁ g 18.8). In adults, the 
spinal cord ends at the L 1/2 disc (ﬁ g 18.9). Mark L 3/4 intervertebral space (or one 
space below, L 4/5), eg by a gentle indentation of a needle cap on the overlying skin 
(better than a ballpoint pen mark, which might be erased by the sterilizing ﬂ uid).
  • Use aseptic technique (hat, mask, gloves, gown) and 2% chlorhexidine in 70% alco-

hol to clean the skin, allow to dry and then place sterile drapes.

  • Open the spinal pack. Assemble the manometer and 3-way tap. Have three plain 

sterile tubes and one ﬂ uoride tube (for glucose) ready.

  • Using a 25G (orange) needle, raise a bleb of local anaesthetic, then use a 21G (green) 

needle to inﬁ ltrate deeper.

  • Wait 1min, then insert spinal needle (22G, stilette in place) perpendicular to the 
body, through your mark, aiming slightly up towards the umbilicus. Feel resistance 
of spinal ligaments, and then the dura, then a ‘give’ as the needle enters the suba-
rachnoid space. NB: keep the bevel of the needle facing up, parallel with dural ﬁ bres.
  • Withdraw stilette. Check CSF ﬁ lls needle and attach manometer (3-way tap turned 

off  towards you) to measure ‘opening’ pressure.

  • Catch ﬂ uid in three sequentially numbered bottles (10 drops per tube).
  • Reinsert stilette then remove needle and apply dressing. Document the procedure 

clearly in the notes including CSF appearance and opening pressure.

  • Send CSF promptly for microscopy, culture, protein, lactate, and glucose (do plas-
ma glucose too)—call the lab to let them know. If applicable, also send for: cytol-
ogy, fungal studies, TB culture, virology (± herpes and other PCR), syphilis serology, 
oligoclonal bands (+serum sample for comparison) if multiple sclerosis suspected. 
Is there xanthochromia (p478)?

  • If you fail; ask for help—try with the patient sitting or with radiological guidance.
CSF  composition  Normal  values:  Lymphocytes  <5/mm3;  no  polymorphs;  protein 
<0.4g/L; glucose >2.2mmol/L (or ≥50% plasma level); pressure <200mm CSF. In men-
ingitis: See p822. In multiple sclerosis: See p496.
Bloody tap: This is an artefact due to piercing a blood vessel, which is indicated 
(unreliably) by fewer red cells in successive bottles, and no yellowing of CSF (xa n-
thochromia). To estimate how many white cells (W) were in the CSF before the blood 
was added, use the following:

W = CSF WCC Ω [(blood WCC ≈ CSF RBC) ÷ blood RBC].
If the blood count is normal, the rule of thumb is to subtract from the total CSF WCC 
(per μL) one white cell for every 1000 RBCS. To estimate the true protein level, subtract 
10mg/L for every 1000 RBCS/mm3 (be sure to do the count and protein estimation on 
the same bottle). NB: high protein levels in CSF make it appear yellow. Subarachnoid 
haemorrhage: Xanthochromia (yellow supernatant on spun CSF). Red cells in equal 
numbers in all bottles (unreliable). RBCS will excite an inﬂ ammatory response (eg CSF 
WCC raised), most marked after 48h. Raised protein: Meningitis; MS; Guillain–Barré 
syndrome. Very raised CSF protein: Spinal block; TB; or severe bacterial meningitis.

_OHCM_10e.indb   768

_OHCM_10e.indb   768

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
769

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Complications
  • Post-dural  puncture  headache.  • Infection.  • Bleeding.  • Cerebral  herniation 
(rare, check for signs of ICP before proceeding). • Minor/transient neurological 
symptoms, eg paraesthesia, radiculopathy.
Any change in lower body neurology after an LP (pain, weakness, sensory changes, 
bladder/bowel disturbance) should be treated as cauda equina compression (hae-
matoma/abscess) until proven otherwise. Obtain an urgent MRI spine.
Post-LP brain MRI scans often show diff use meningeal enhancement with gado-
linium. This is thought to be a reﬂ ection of increased blood ﬂ ow secondary to 
intracranial hypotension. Interpret these scans with caution and in the context of 
the patient’s clinical situation. Ensure the reason for the scan and current neuro-
logical examination are discussed with the radiologist pre procedure.

Post-LP headache

Risk 10–30%, typically occurring within 24h of LP, resolution over hours to 2wks 
(mean: 3–4d). Patients describe a constant, dull ache, more frontal than occipi-
tal. The most characteristic symptom is of positional exacerbation—worse when 
upright. There may be mild meningism or nausea. The pathology is thought to 
be continued leakage of CSF from the puncture site and intracranial hypotension, 
though there may be other mechanisms involved.
Prevention Use the smallest spinal needle that is practical (22G) and keep the 
bevel aligned as described on p768. Blunt needles (more expensive) can reduce risk 
and are recommended (ask an anaesthetist about supply); however, collection of 
CSF takes too long (>6min) if needles smaller than 22G are used. Before withdraw-
ing the needle, reinsert the stilette.
Treatment Despite years of anecdotal advice to the contrary, none of the follow-
ing has ever been shown to be a risk factor: position during or after the procedure; 
hydration status before, during, or after; amount of CSF removed; immediate activ-
ity or rest post-LP. Time is a consistent healer. For severe or prolonged headaches, 
ask an anaesthetist about a blood patch. This is a careful injection of 20mL of 
autologous venous blood into the adjacent epidural space (said to ‘clog up the 
hole’). Immediate relief occurs in 95%.

Fig 18.8  Deﬁ ning the 3rd–4th lumbar vertebral interspace.

Adapted with permission from Vakil et al.,  Diagnosis and Management of
Medical Emergencies, 1977 Oxford University Press.

Fig  18.9  Axial  T2-weighted  MRI  of  the  lumbar 
spine.  The  conus  ends  at  the  L1/L2  level  with 
cont inuation of the cauda equina. Lumbar punc-
ture  below  the  L2  level  will  not  damage  the 
cauda equina as the nerve roots will part around 
an LP needle.

Image courtesy of Norwich Radiology Dept.

_OHCM_10e.indb   769

_OHCM_10e.indb   769

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
770

Cardioversion/deﬁ brillation

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Do not wait for a crisis before familiarizing yourself with the deﬁ brillator, as there 
are several types. All hospitals should include this information in your induction but 
check how the machine on your ward works.
Indications To restore sinus rhythm if VF/VT; AF, ﬂ utter, or supraventricular tachy-
cardias  if  other  treatments  (p126)  have  failed,  or  there  is  haemodynamic  compro-
mise (p130 & p806). This may be done as an emergency, 
eg VF/VT, or electively, eg AF.
Aim To completely depolarize the heart using a direct 
current.
Procedure For VF/pulseless VT follow the ALS algo-
rithm on p894 and call the arrest team!
  • Unless  critically  unwell,  conscious  patients  require  a 

general anaesthetic or monitored heavy sedation.

  • If elective cardioversion of AF ensure adequate antico-

Fig 18.10  The dampened sine 
monophasic waveform.

agulation beforehand.

  • Almost all deﬁ brillators are now paddle-free and use 
‘hands-free’ pads instead (less chance of skin arc than 
jelly). Place the pads on chest, one over apex (p39) and 
one below right clavicle. The positions are often given 
by a diagram on the reverse of the pad.

Cardioversion: Synchronize the shock with the rhythm 
by pressing the ‘SYNC’ button on the machine. This en-
sures the shock does not initiate a ventricular arrhyth-
mia. However, this only works for cardioversion; if the 
sync  mode  is  engaged  in  VF,  the  deﬁ brillator  will  not 
discharge.
  • Monophasic deﬁ brillators: (ﬁ g 18.10) Set the energy 

Fig  18.11  Rectilinear  bipha-
sic  waveform  with  truncated 
exponential  decay.  Most  new 
external deﬁ brillators use this 
waveform.

level at 360J for VF/VT (arrest situation); 200J for AF; 50J for atrial ﬂ utter.

  • Biphasic  deﬁ brillators: (ﬁ g 18.11) Impedance is less with a biphasic shock and 
120–200J is used for shocks for VF/VT. They use less energy and are just as eff ective 
as monophasic deﬁ bs in cardio version. 120–200J will cardiovert most arrhythmias.
  • Automatic external deﬁ brillators: (AEDS) Can be used by anyone who can turn 

them on and apply the pads. Follow the instructions given by the AED.

Shocking

1      Consider anticoagulation in AF (see p130).
2      Clearly state that you are charging the deﬁ brillator.
3      Make sure no one else is touching the patient, the bed, or anything is in turn 

touching these.

4      Clearly state that you are about to shock the patient.
5      Give the shock. If there is a change in rhythm before you shock and the shock 
is no longer required, turn the dial to ‘discharge’. Do not allow anyone to ap-
proach until the reading has dropped to 0J.

6      After a shock: in resuscitation, resume CPR immediately and do not reassess 
rhythm  until  the  end  of  the  cycle  (see  p894,  ﬁ g  A3);  in  cardioversion,  watch 
ECG; consider need to repeat the shock. Up to three are usual for AF/ﬂ utter.

7      Get an up-to-date 12-lead ECG.

In children, use 4J/kg in VF/VT; see OHCS p239.

_OHCM_10e.indb   770

_OHCM_10e.indb   770

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
771

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Taking arterial blood gas (ABG) samples
Having  an  artery  sampled 
is  more  unpleasant  for  the 
patient  than  venepuncture: 
explain that it is going to feel 
diff erent and is for a diff erent 
purpose  (p162  for  indications 
and analysis). The usual site is 
the radial artery at the wrist. 
Check with the patient that 
they  do  not  have  an  arterio-
venous ﬁ stula for haemodial-
ysis. Never, ever sample from 
a ﬁ stula.
Procedure:
  • Get  kit  ready;  include:  port-
able sharps bin; pre-heparin-
ized syringe; needle (blue size 
(23G) is good, although many 
syringes now come pre-made with needle); gloves; 2% chlorhexidine/70% alco-
hol swab; gauze; tape.

Fig 18.12  The ideal position for the wrist, slightly hyperex-
tended, resting on an unopened litre bag of ﬂ uid or a band-
age is ideal. In an unconscious patient or for arterial line 
insertion, taping the thumb to the bed can hold the wrist in 
the perfect position if you do not have an assistant.

  • Feel thoroughly for the best site. Look at both sides.
  • Wipe with cleaning swab. Let the area dry. Get yourself comfortable.
  • If the patient is drowsy or unconscious, ask an assistant to hold the hand and 

arm with the wrist slightly extended (ﬁ g 18.12).

  • Before sampling, expel any excess heparin in the syringe. Inﬁ ltration over the 
artery with a small amount of 1% lidocaine (p573) through a 25G (orange) needle 
makes the procedure painless.

  • Hold the syringe like a pen, with the needle bevel up. Let the patient know you 
are about to take the sample. Feel for the pulse with your other hand and enter 
at 45°, aiming beneath the ﬁ nger you are feeling with.

  • In most syringes, the plunger will move up on its own in a pulsatile manner if 
you are in the artery; rarely, entry into a vein next to the artery will give a similar 
result. Colour of the blood is little guide to its source.

  • Allow  the  syringe  to  ﬁ ll  with 
1–2mL, then remove the needle 
and apply ﬁ rm pressure for 5 
minutes (10 if anticoagulated).
  • Expel any air from the syringe 
as  this  will  alter  the  oxygen-
ation  of  the  blood.  Cap  and 
label  the  sample,  check  the 
patient’s temperature and FiO2 
(0.21 if on air). Take the sample 
to  the  nearest  analysis  ma-
chine or send it by express de-
livery to the lab (which may be 
by your own feet, get someone 
else to apply pressure) as it should be analysed within 15 minutes of sampling.
  • Syringes and analysis machines diff er, so get familiar with the local nuances.
The other site that is amenable to ABG sampling is the femoral artery (ﬁ g 18.13). 
Surprisingly this may be less uncomfortable as it is a relatively less sensitive area 
and because, when supine, the patient cannot see the needle and thus may feel less 
apprehensive. The brachial artery can also be used, but be aware that the median 
nerve sits closely on its medial side and it is an end-artery. Normal values: p753.

Fig  18.13  The  femoral  artery  is  amenable  to  ABG 
sampling.

_OHCM_10e.indb   771

_OHCM_10e.indb   771

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
772

Emergency airway management

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Cricothyroidotomy Thsi is an emergency procedure to overcome airway obstruc-
tion above the level of the larynx. It should only be done in absolute ‘can’t intubate, 
can’t ventilate’ situations, ie where ventilation is impossible with a bag and mask (± 
airway adjuncts) and where there is an immediate threat to life. If not, call anaes-
thetics or ENT for immediate help.
Indications Upper airway obstruction when endotracheal intubation not possible, 
eg  irretrievable  foreign  body;  facial  oedema  (burns,  angio-oedema);  maxillofacial 
trauma; infection (epiglottitis).
Procedure Lie the patient supine with neck extended (eg pillow under shoulders) 
unless there is suspected cervical-spine instability. Run your index ﬁ nger down the 
neck anteriorly in the midline to ﬁ nd the notch in the upper border of the thyroid 
cartilage (the Adam’s apple): just below this, between the thyroid and cricoid carti-
lages, is a depression—the cricothyroid membrane (see ﬁ g 18.14). If you cannot feel 
the  depression  and  it  is  an  emergency, 
you can access the trachea directly ap-
proximately halfway between the cricoid 
cartilage and the suprasternal notch.
Ideally  use  a  purpose-designed  kit
(eg  QuickTrach∏,  MiniTrach∏),  all  hos-
pitals will stock one version. If no kit is 
available  then  a  cannula  (needle  crico-
thyroidotomy) can buy time, and in out-
of-hospital situations a blade and empty 
biro case have saved lives. Needle and 
kit  cricothyroidotomies  are  temporary 
measures pending formal tracheostomy.
1 Needle cricothyroidotomy: Pierce the membrane perpendicular to the skin with 
large-bore cannula (14G) attached to syringe: withdrawal of air conﬁ rms position; 
lidocaine may or may not be required. Slide cannula over needle at 45° to the skin 
superiorly in the sagittal plane. Use a Y-connector (see ﬁ g 18.16) or improvise con-
nection to O2 supply at 15L/min: use thumb on Y-connector to allow O2 in over 1s 
and CO2 out over 4s (‘transtracheal jet insuffl  ation’). This is the preferred method in 
children <12yrs. This will only sustain life for 30–45min before CO2 builds up. However, 
if the patient has a completely obstructed airway then they will not be able to exhale 
through this, and it will lead to cardiovascular compromise and pneumothoraces.
2  Cricothyroidotomy  kit:  Most  contain  a  guarded  blade,  and  a  large  (4–6mm) 
shaped cannula (cuff ed or uncuff ed depending on brand) over an introducer, plus 
a connector and binding tape. The patient will have to be ventilated via a bag, as 
the resistance is too high to breathe spontaneously. This will sustain for 30–45min.
3  Surgical  cricothyroidotomy:  Smallest  tube  for  prolonged  ventilation  is  6mm. 
Introduce high-volume, low-pressure cuff  tracheostomy tube through a horizontal 
incision in membrane. Take care not to cut the thyroid or cricoid cartilages.
Complications Local haemorrhage ± aspiration; posterior perforation of trachea 
± oesophagus; subglottic stenosis; laryngeal stenosis if membrane over-incised in 
childhood; tube blockage; subcutaneous tunnelling; vocal cord paralysis or hoarse-
ness  (the  recurrent  laryngeal  nerve  runs  superiorly  in  the  tracheo-oesophageal 
groove).

Fig 18.14  The cricothyroid membrane.

_OHCM_10e.indb   772

_OHCM_10e.indb   772

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
773

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Emergency needle pericardiocentesis

Fig 18.15  Emergency needle pericardiocentesis.

  • Get your senior’s help (for whom this page may serve as an aide-memoire).
  • Equipment: 20mL syringe, long 18G cannula, 3-way tap, ECG monitor, skin cleanser. 

Use ECHO guidance if there is time.

  • If time allows, use full aseptic technique, at a minimum clean skin with 2% chlo-
rhexidine in 70% alcohol and wear sterile gloves, and, if conscious, use local an-
aesthesia and sedation, eg with slow IV midazolam: titrate up to 3.5–5mg—start 
with 2mg over 1min, 0.5–1mg in elderly (in whom the maximum dose is 3.5mg; 
inject at the rate of 2mg/min)—antidote: ﬂ umazenil 0.2mg IV over 15s, then 0.1mg 
every 60s, up to 1mg in total.
Ensure you have IV access and full resuscitation equipment to hand.

  • Introduce needle at 45° to skin just below and to left of xiphisternum, aiming 
for tip of left scapula (ﬁ g 18.15). Aspirate continuously and watch ECG. Frequent 
ventricular ectopics or an injury pattern (ST segment) on  ECG imply that the 
myocardium has been breached—withdraw slightly. As soon as ﬂ uid is obtained 
through the needle, slide the cannula into place.

  • Evacuate pericardial contents through the syringe and 3-way tap. Removal of 
only a small amount of ﬂ uid (eg 20mL) can produce marked clinical improve-
ment. If you are not sure whether the ﬂ uid you are aspirating is pure blood (eg 
on entering a ventricle), see if it clots (heavily bloodstained pericardial ﬂ uid does 
not clot), or measure its PCV (though this may be diffi  cult in the acute setting but 
some blood gas analysers may give this).

  • You can leave the cannula in situ temporarily, for repeated aspiration. If there is 

reaccumulation, insert a drain but peric ardiectomy may be needed.
  • Send ﬂ uid for microscopy and culture, as needed, including tests for TB.
Complications: Laceration of ventricle or coronary artery (± subsequent haemo-
pericardium); aspiration of ventricular blood; arrhythmias (ventricular ﬁ brillation); 
pneumothorax; puncture of aorta, oesophagus (± mediastinitis), or peritoneum (± 
peritonitis).

Fig 18.16  Methods of providing oxygen.

_OHCM_10e.indb   773

_OHCM_10e.indb   773

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
774

Central venous cannulation

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Central venous cannulae may be inserted to measure central venous pressure (CVP), 
to administer certain drugs (eg amiodarone, chemotherapy), or for intravenous ac-
cess (ﬂ uid, parenteral nutrition). In an emergency, the procedure can be done using 
the landmark method (see p775), though NICE recommends that all routine internal 
jugular catheters should be placed with US guidance. Even if the line is not placed 
under direct US visualization, a look to check vessel size, position in relation to artery, 
and patency (no thrombus or stenosis) is extremely useful. For contraindications, 
see table 18.2.
Table 18.2  Contraindications to central venous cannulation
Absolute
Infection at insertion site

Relative
Coagulopathy
Ipsilateral carotid endarterectomy
Newly inserted cardiac pacemaker leads
Thrombus within the vein
Venous stenosis
Ipsilateral abnormal anatomy

Sites of insertion These include the internal jugular vein (see p775 and p43), sub-
clavian vein, and the femoral vein. The choice depends largely on operator experi-
ence, but evidence suggests that the femoral approach is associated with a higher 
rate of line infection and thrombosis. Overall, the internal jugular approach (with 
ultrasound guidance) is most commonly used and risks fewer complications than 
the subclavian. If possible, get written consent (p568). Check clotting and platelets. 
The technique for internal jugular (routine) and femoral (emergency) are given here.
Complications (~20%.) Insertion is not without hazard, so decide whether the pa-
tient requires a line ﬁ rst, and then ask for help if you are inexperienced.
Bleeding; arterial puncture/cannulation; AV ﬁ stula formation; air embolism; pneu-
mothorax; haemothorax; chylothorax (lymph); phrenic nerve palsy (the right phrenic 
nerve passes over the brachiocephalic artery, posterior to the subclavian vein—hic-
cups may be a sign of injury); phlebitis; thrombus formation on tip or in vein (if high 
risk for thromboembolism, eg malignancy, consider anticoagulation, eg LMWH); bac-
terial colonization; cellulitis; sepsis (can be reduced by adherence to a strict aseptic 
technique; if taking blood cultures in a febrile patient with a central venous line, 
remember to take samples from the central line and from a peripheral vein).
Peripherally inserted central cannulas (PICC lines) These are a good alternative 
to central lines, as they can stay in situ for up to 6 months, and provide access for 
blood sampling, ﬂ uids, antibiotics (allowing home IV therapy). They are placed using 
a  Seldinger  technique,  puncturing  the  brachial  or  basilic  vein  then  threading  the 
line into the subclavian or superior vena cava. Because of the insertion site there 
is a much lower risk of pneumo- or haemothorax, but they are tricky to insert in an 
emergency.
Removing central lines Should be done carefully with aseptic technique. Position 
the patient slightly head down, remove dressings, clean and drape the area, remove 
sutures. Ask the patient to inhale and hold their breath, then breathe out smoothly 
while you are pulling the line out. This helps to prevent air emboli. Ask the patient 
to rehearse this sequence with you to ensure they have understood their role. Apply 
pressure for 5 minutes (longer if coagulopathic).

_OHCM_10e.indb   774

_OHCM_10e.indb   774

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
775

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Internal jugular catheterization

Internal jugular Should be the approach of choice in a non-emergency situation. 
Ideally the right side as it off ers a direct route to the heart and there is less chance 
of misplacement of the line compared to the left. The subclavian approach is trickier 
and best taught by an expert. Use US guidance if at all possible, ideally to insert the 
line under direct vision, but at least to deﬁ ne the anatomy. If possible, have the pa-
tient attached to a cardiac monitor in case of arrhythmias.
  • Position the patient slightly head down to avoid air embolism and ﬁ ll the veins to 
improve your chances of success. This can compromise cardiac function and pre-
cipitate acute LVF so check if your patient has a cardiac history. Minimize the time 
the patient is head down; if they are unable to lie ﬂ at, consider a femoral approach. 
Turn their head slightly to the left.

  • This should be a sterile procedure so use full aseptic technique (hat, mask, gloves, 
gown) and clean with 2% chlorhexidine in 70% isopropyl alcohol before draping. 
Ensure your equipment is prepared, ﬂ ush the catheter lumens with saline.

  • If  US  is  unavailable,  the  landmark  procedure  can  be  used  to  identify  insertion 

point—approximately at the junction of the two 
heads of sternocleidomastoid at about the level 
of  the  thyroid  cartilage  (ﬁ g  18.17).  Feel  gently 
for  the  carotid  pulse,  then  inﬁ ltrate  with  1% 
lidocaine just lateral to this. The vein is usually 
superﬁ cial (ﬁ g 18.18).

  • Insert the introducer needle with a 5mL syringe 
attached, advance gently at a 45° angle, aiming 
for the ipsilateral nipple and aspirating continu-
ously. If you are using US, watch the needle tip 
enter  the  vein,  if  the  landmark  approach  keep 
your ﬁ ngers on the carotid pulse.

  • As soon as blood is aspirated, lay down the  US 
probe and hold the introducer needle in position, 
remove  the  syringe  and  thread  the  guidewire 
through the needle. It should pass easily, if there 
is resistance try lowering the angle of the needle 
and gently advancing the wire. If the wire will not 
pass do not remove it alone, the tip can shear off  
and embolize; remove the needle with the wire, 
apply pressure and attempt a second puncture.

Fig  18.17  Position  of 
internal 
jugular and subclavian veins (red) 
compared to the clavicle (yellow). 

Fig  18.18  Vessels  seen  on  ultra-
sound.  The  compressible  vein  is 
above the artery. 

  • If the wire threads easily, insert to 30cm (see markings on the wire), remove the 
needle keeping hold of the wire at all times. Make a nick in the skin with a scalpel 
at the insertion point, and gently thread the dilator over the wire. You do not need 
to insert the dilator far, only as far as the vein (you often feel a loss of resistance 
as the dilator enters the vein, so insert gently: a pneumothorax can result from 
enthusiastic dilating).

  • Remove  the  dilator,  keeping  hold  of  the  wire,  thread  the  ﬂ ushed  catheter  over 
the wire, then remove the wire. The line should sit at about 13cm on the right side 
(17cm on the left). Check you can aspirate blood from each lumen, then ﬂ ush them.
  • Suture the catheter in place (many have little ‘wings’ for suturing) and dress. Re-
quest a CXR to conﬁ rm position and exclude pneumothorax. The tip of the catheter 
should sit vertically in the SVC.

Femoral vein In an emergency situation where ultrasound is not easily accessible, 
if the patient is unable to lie ﬂ at, or where speed is of the essence, the femoral ap-
proach is often the safest, as there is no risk of pneumothorax or haemothorax and a 
much reduced risk of arrhythmia. The technique is similar to internal jugular, except 
the insertion point is just medial to the femoral artery at the groin crease.
Subclavian vein Should be taught by an expert and should ideally be carried out 
under  US guidance. Some physicians prefer this approach, but even in experienced 
hands there is a risk of complications compared to US-guided internal jugular lines.

_OHCM_10e.indb   775

_OHCM_10e.indb   775

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
776

Inserting a temporary cardiac pacemaker

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Often it is wiser to liaise with a specialist pacing centre to arrange prompt, deﬁ nitive 
pacing than to try temporary transvenous pacing, which often has complications 
(see later in topic) and therefore may delay a deﬁ nitive procedure.
Possible indications in the acute phase of myocardial infarction
  • Complete AV block:

  • With inferior MI (right coronary artery occlusion) pacing may only be needed if 

symptomatic; spontaneous recovery may occur.

  • With anterior MI (representing massive septal infarction).

  • Second-degree block:

  • Wenckebach (p99; implies decremental AV node conduction; may respond to 

atropine in an inferior MI; pace if anterior MI).

  • Mobitz type 2 block is usually associated with distal fascicular disease and car-

ries high risk of complete heart block, so pace in both types of MI.
  • First-degree block: Observe carefully: 40% develop higher degrees of block.
  • Bundle  branch  block:  Pace  prophylactically  if  evidence  of  trifascicular  disease 

(p100) or non-adjacent bifascicular disease.

  • Sino-atrial disease + serious symptoms: Pace unless responds to atropine.
Other indications where temporary pacing may be needed
  • Pre-op:  if  surgery  is  required  in  patients  with  type  2  or  complete  heart  block 

(whether or not MI has occurred); do 24h ECG; liaise with the anaesthetist.

  • Drug poisoning, eg with -blockers, digoxin, or verapamil.
  • Symptomatic bradycardia, uncontrolled by atropine or isoprenaline.
  • Suppression of drug-resistant VT and SVT (overdrive pacing; do on ICU).
  • Asystolic cardiac arrest with P-wave activity (ventricular standstill).
  • During or after cardiac surgery—eg around the AV node or bundle of His.
Technique for temporary transvenous pacing Learn from an expert.
  • Preparation: Monitor ECG; have a deﬁ brillator to hand, ensure the patient has pe-
ripheral access; check that a radiographer with screening equipment is present. If 
you are screening, wear a protective lead apron.

  • Insertion: Using an aseptic technique, place the introducer into the (ideally right) 
internal jugular vein (p775) or subclavian. If this is diffi  cult, access to the right 
atrium can be achieved via the femoral vein. Pass the pacing wire through the 
introducer into the right atrium, ideally under radiological screening. It will either 
pass easily through the tricuspid valve or loop within the atrium. If the latter oc-
curs, it is usually possible to ﬂ ip the wire across the valve with a combined twisting 
and withdrawing movement (ﬁ g 18.19). Advance the wire slightly. At this stage the 
wire may try to exit the ventricle through the pulmonary outﬂ ow tract. A further 
withdrawing and rotation of the wire will aim the tip at the apex of the right ven-
tricle. Advance slightly again to place the wire in contact with the endocardium. 
Remove any slack to risk of subsequent displacement.

  • Checking the threshold: Connect the wire to the pacing box and set the ‘demand’ 
rate slightly higher than the patient’s own heart rate and the output to 3V. A paced 
rhythm should be seen. Find the pacing threshold by slowly reducing the voltage 
until the pacemaker fails to stimulate the tissue (pacing spikes are no longer fol-
lowed by paced beats). The threshold should be less than 1V, but a slightly higher 
value may be acceptable if it is stable—eg after a large infarction.

  • Setting the pacemaker: Set the output to 3V or over 3 times the threshold value 
(whichever is higher) in ‘demand’ mode. Set the rate as required. Suture the wire to 
the skin, and ﬁ x with a sterile dressing.

  • Check the position of the wire (and exclude pneumothorax) with a CXR.
  • Recurrent checks of the pacing threshold are required over the next few days. The 

formation of endocardial oedema can raise the threshold by a factor of 2–3.

Complications Pneumothorax; sepsis; cardiac perforation; pacing failure: from loss 
of capture, loss of electrical continuity in pacing circuit, or electrode displacement.

_OHCM_10e.indb   776

_OHCM_10e.indb   776

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
777

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
t
c
a
r
P

Fig 18.19  Siting a temporary cardiac pacemaker.

Non-invasive transcutaneous cardiac pacing
This method (performed through a deﬁ brillator with external pacing facility) has 
the advantages of being quicker, less risky than the transvenous route, and easier 
to perform. Its main disadvantage is the pain caused by skeletal muscle contrac-
tion  in  the  non-sedated  patient.  Indications  for  pacing  via  the  transcutaneous 
route are as p776, plus if transvenous pacing (or someone able to perform it) is 
unavailable or will be delayed in an emergency situation.
  • Give sedation and analgesia, eg midazolam + morphine IV titrated to eff ect.
  • Clipping chest hair may help improve electrical contact; don’t shave the skin, as 

nicks can predispose to electrical burns. Ensure the skin is dry.

  • Almost all modern transcutaneous devices can function through deﬁ brillation 
‘hands-free’ pads, and so these can be applied as for deﬁ brillation (see p770). 
If necessary, the pads can be placed in an AP position: anteriorly over the V2–V3 
electrode position and posteriorly at the same level, just below the scapula.

  • Select ‘demand’ mode, (which synchronizes the stimulus with the  R wave, so 
avoiding pacing on the T wave—which can provoke VF or VT) and adjust the ECG 
gain so that QRS complexes can be seen.

  • Select an appropriate pacing rate: eg 60–90bpm in an adult.
  • Set the pacing current at the lowest setting and turn on the pacemaker.
  • Increase the pacing current until electrical capture occurs (normally from 50–
100mA), which can be conﬁ rmed by seeing a wide QRS complex and a T wave on 
the trace (ventricular electrical capture).

  • There will be some interference from skeletal muscle contraction on the ECG trace, 
as well as possible artefact, which could be mistaken for a QRS complex. The ab-
sence of a T wave in the former is an important discriminator between the two.
  • CPR can continue with the pads in place, though only when the pacing unit is off.
  • Once adequate cardiac output has been maintained, seek expert help and ar-

range transvenous pacing.

_OHCM_10e.indb   777

_OHCM_10e.indb   777

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
19  Emergencies

Contents
Emergency presentations:
Headache  780
Breathlessness  782
Chest pain  784
Coma  786
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)  788
Shock  790
Sepsis  792
Anaphylactic shock  794
Cardiovascular emergencies:
Acute coronary syndrome—with

ST-elevation  796

Acute coronary syndrome—without ST-

elevation  798

Severe pulmonary oedema  800
Cardiogenic shock  802
Broad complex tachycardia  804
Narrow complex tachycardia   806
Bradycardia   808
Respiratory emergencies:
Acute severe asthma  810
Acute exacerbations of COPD  812
Pneumothorax  814
Tension pneumothorax  814
Pneumonia  816
Pulmonary embolism (PE)  818
Gastrointestinal emergencies:
Acute upper GI bleeding  820
Neurological emergencies:
Meningitis  822
Encephalitis  824
Cerebral abscess  824
Status epilepticus  826
Head injury  828
Raised intracranial pressure (ICP)  830
Endocrinological emergencies:
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)  832
Other diabetic emergencies  834
Thyroid emergencies  834
Addisonian crisis  836
Hypopituitary coma  836
Phaeochromocytoma emergencies  837
Acute poisoning  838–41
Some speciﬁ c poisons and their 

antidotes  842

Paracetamol poisoning  844
Salicylate poisoning  844
Burns  846
Hypothermia  848
Major disasters  850

Fig  19.1  Dr  Leander  Starr  Jameson  (1853–
1917) was a Victorian physician barely known 
to the history of our profession and yet im-
mortalized by the idealization of his charac-
ter  in  Rudyard  Kipling’s  poem  ‘If ’.  Kipling’s 
words  contain  much  that  might  guide  the 
doctor faced with a sudden and unexpected 
emergency. Beyond the oft quoted exhorta-
tion to ‘keep your head when all about you 
are  losing  theirs’,  Kipling  also  endorsed 
an  appropriate  degree  of  self-conﬁ dence 
(‘trust yourself when all men doubt you, But 
make  allowance  for  their  doubting  too’), 
encouraged  realism  (‘meet  with  Triumph 
and  Disaster  And  treat  those  two  impos-
tors just the same’), and a large measure of 
courage  (‘force  your  heart  and  nerve  and 
sinew To serve your turn long after they are 
gone, And so hold on when there is nothing 
in you Except the Will which says to them: 
“Hold  on!” ’).  But  what  of  Dr  James?  As  a 
house  offi  cer  in  London,  he  broke  down 
from overwork and moved to take up what 
would  become  a  distinguished  practice  in 
South  Africa.  A  foray  into  the  military  ill-
suited him and he ended up in jail for leading 
a botched raid that was so out-of-character 
that it seems he allowed himself to become a 
scapegoat for others higher in government. 
He died in November 1917, outliving Kipling’s 
son John, who was killed in the trenches in 
1915 at the age of 18, and to whom ‘If ’ was 
addressed: ‘Yours is the Earth and everything 
that’s in it, And—which is more—you’ll be a 
Man, my son.’

Reproduced under Creative Commons 
Attribution only licence CC BY 4.0 from Wellcome 
Library, London. Sir Leander Starr Jameson. 
Colour lithograph by Sir L. Ward [Spy], 1896.

We thank Dr Andrew Johnston and Bernard Ho, our Junior Reader, for their contribution.

_OHCM_10e.indb   778

_OHCM_10e.indb   778

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

779
779

s
s
e
e
i
i
c
c
n
n
e
e
g
g
r
r
e
e
m
m
E
E

Introduction to emergencies
Some doctors enjoy the adrenaline rush of seeing an emergency case and pulling 
someone back from the edge of death. Some fear the emergency take, worried as 
to what they will miss, how many will die. There is no right approach; the emer-
gency room needs both thought and practicality to manage patients. A patient 
who comes in ﬂ at and can be resuscitated gives the whole team a boost, as right 
there in front of us is the proof that we can make a diff erence. However, a patient 
who comes in well and collapses, dying before we can even decide what is wrong, 
can bring the whole team down. There are nights where we save life after life, and 
nights where we can’t; sometimes a death is inevitable, despite our best eff orts. 
You are a doctor, but you are a human being as well, and losing a patient can feel 
like a personal failure. However, remember that when we lose a patient it is the 
disease that has killed them, not us. Try to take a few minutes and reﬂ ect on what 
happened; ask if you could have done anything diff erently. Should you have sought 
help sooner? Discussing with a senior can be helpful, as can writing down your 
reﬂ ection, not in a portfolio for discussion at your appraisal, but in anonymous for-
mat for your own education. Watch the team at an arrest, the best leaders are the 
ones who have learned to stand back, assess the whole situation, and take enough 
time to see where the critical intervention is needed. There is no substitute for 
experience, nobody becomes a consultant overnight, but watch the best clinicians 
at work and you will learn both practical and life skills.
Most important in an emergency situation is communication. Wherever you can, 
involve the relatives and the whole team in discussions, but remember that at the 
heart of this is a patient. What do they want? Never be afraid to ask the patient 
directly, they may hold very strong views. However, it is up to us as physicians to 
be honest with them about their prognosis—do not off er a treatment you know 
is not in the best interests of the patient, and this includes resuscitation. When 
faced with death, many patients are afraid—our role is to try to relieve that fear, 
whether by intervening to delay death, or by easing their passing. But we cannot 
ever prevent death, we simply delay it. As Shakespeare has Julius Caesar say:
‘Of all the wonders that I have yet heard, it seems to me most strange that men 
should fear, seeing that death, a necessary end, will come when it will come.’

ABCDE preliminary assessment (primary survey)
Airway 

Protect cervical spine, if injury possible.
Assessment: any signs of obstruction? Ascertain patency.
Management: establish a patent airway.

Breathing  Assessment: determine respiratory rate, check bilateral chest move-

ment, percuss, and auscultate.
Management: if no respiratory eff ort, treat as arrest (see p894, ﬁ g 
A3),  intubate  and  ventilate.  If  breathing  compromised,  give  high-
concentration O2, manage according to ﬁ ndings, eg relieve tension 
pneumothorax.

Circulation  Assessment:  check  pulse  and  BP;  check  if  peripherally  shut 
down;  check  capillary  reﬁ ll;  look  for  evidence  of  haemorrhage. 
Management: if shocked, treat as on p790.
If no cardiac output, treat as arrest (see p894, ﬁ g A3).
Disability  Assess ‘level of consciousness’ with AVPU score (alert? responds to 
voice? to pain? unresponsive?); check pupils: size, equality, reactions. 
Glasgow Coma Scale, if time allows.
Exposure  Undress patient, but cover to avoid hypothermia.
Quick history from relatives assists diagnosis: Events surrounding onset of illness, 
evidence of overdose/suicide attempt, any suggestion of trauma? Past medical 
history, especially diabetes, asthma,  COPD, alcohol, opiate or street drug abuse, 
epilepsy or recent head injury, recent travel. Medication, current drugs. Allergies.
Once  ventilation  and  circulation  are  adequate,  proceed  to  carry  out  history, 
examination, investigations, and management in the usual way.

_OHCM_10e.indb   779

_OHCM_10e.indb   779

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
 
 
 
780

Headache: diff  erential diagnosis

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

The vast majority of headaches are benign, but when taking a history do not forget 
to ask about the following1 (early diagnosis can save lives):
Worrying features or ‘red ﬂ ags’
  • First and worst headache—subarachnoid haemorrhage (p478).
  • Thunderclap headache—subarachnoid haemorrhage (p478: p480 for other causes).
  • Unilateral headache and eye pain—cluster headache, acute glaucoma (p456).
  • Unilateral headache and ipsilateral symptoms—migraine, tumour, vascular (p458).
  • Cough-initiated headache—ICP/venous thrombosis (p480).
  • Worse in the morning or bending forward—ICP/venous thrombosis (p480).
  • Persisting headache ± scalp tenderness in over-50s—giant cell arteritis (p556).
  • Headache with fever or neck stiff ness—meningitis (p822).
  • Change in the pattern of ‘usual headaches’ (p456).
  • Decreased level of consciousness (p456).
Two other vital questions:
  • Where have you been? (Malaria, p416).
  • Might you be pregnant? (Pre-eclampsia; especially if proteinuria and BP, p458.)
Always examine a patient presenting with a severe headache; if nothing about his-
tory or examination is concerning, both you and the patient will be reassured, but 
subtle abnormalities are important not to miss.
No signs on examination
  • Tension headache (p456).
  • Migraine (p458).
  • Cluster headache (p457).
  • Post-traumatic (p456).
  • Drugs (nitrates, calcium-channel antagonists) (p114).
  • Carbon monoxide poisoning or anoxia. (p842)
  • Subarachnoid haemorrhage (p478).
Signs of meningism?
  • Meningitis (may not have fever or rash—p822).
  • Subarachnoid haemorrhage (p478—examination may be normal).
Decreased conscious level or localizing signs?
  • Stroke (p470).
  • Encephalitis/meningitis (p822).
  • Cerebral abscess (p824).
  • Subarachnoid haemorrhage (pp478–9, ﬁ gs 10.17, 10.18).
  • Venous sinus occlusion (p480—focal neurological deﬁ cits).
  • Tumour (p498).
  • Subdural haematoma (p482).
  • TB meningitis (p393).
Papilloedema?
  • Tumour (p498).
  • Venous sinus occlusion (p480—focal neurological deﬁ cits).
  • Malignant (accelerated phase) hypertension (p138).
  • Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (p498).
  • Any CNS infection, if prolonged (eg >2wks)—eg TB meningitis (p393).
Others
  • Giant cell arteritis (p556—ESR and tender scalp over temporal arteries).
  • Acute glaucoma (p456—painful red eye—get pressures checked urgently).
  • Vertebral artery dissection (p470—neck pain and cerebellar/medullary signs).
  • Cervical spondylosis (p508).
  • Sinusitis.
  • Paget’s disease (p685—ALP).
  • Altitude sickness (OHCS p770).

_OHCM_10e.indb   780

_OHCM_10e.indb   780

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

781

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   781

_OHCM_10e.indb   781

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

782

Breathlessness: emergency presentations

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

There may not be time to ask or the patient may not be able to give you a history in 
acute breathlessness, this in itself can be a helpful sign (inability to complete sen-
tences in one breath = severe breathlessness, inability to speak/impaired conscious 
level = life-threatening). Collateral history of known respiratory disease, anaphylaxis, 
or other history can be extremely helpful but do not delay. Assess the patient for 
the following:
Wheezing?
  • Asthma (p810).
  • COPD (p812).
  • Heart failure (p800).
  • Anaphylaxis (p794).
Stridor? (Upper airway obstruction.)
  • Foreign body or tumour.
  • Acute epiglottitis (younger patients).
  • Anaphylaxis (p794).
  • Trauma, eg laryngeal fracture.
Crepitations?
  • Heart failure (p800).
  • Pneumonia (p816).
  • Bronchiectasis (p172).
  • Fibrosis (p198).
Chest clear?
  • Pulmonary embolism (p818).
  • Hyperventilation.
  • Metabolic acidosis, eg diabetic ketoacidosis (p832).
  • Anaemia (p324).
  • Drugs, eg salicylates.
  • Shock (may cause ‘air hunger’, p790).
  • Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (p400).
  • CNS causes.
Others
  • Pneumothorax  (p814—pain,  increased  resonance,  tracheal  deviation  if  tension 

pneumothorax).

  • Pleural eff usion (p192—‘stony dullness’).
Key investigations
  • Baseline observations—O2 sats, pulse, temperature, peak ﬂ ow.
  • ABG if saturations <94% or concern about acidosis/drugs/sepsis.
  • ECG (signs of PE, LVH, MI?).
  • CXR.
  • Baseline bloods: glucose, FBC, U&E, consider drug screen.

_OHCM_10e.indb   782

_OHCM_10e.indb   782

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

783

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   783

_OHCM_10e.indb   783

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

784

Chest pain: diff  erential diagnosis

First exclude any potentially life-threatening causes, by virtue of history, brief exami-
nation, and limited investigations. Then consider other potential causes. For the full 
assessment of cardiac pain, see pp94, 118.
Life-threatening
  • Acute myocardial infarction (pp796–9).
  • Angina/acute coronary syndrome (pp796–9).
  • Aortic dissection (p655).
  • Tension pneumothorax (p814).
  • Pulmonary embolism (p818).
  • Oesophageal rupture (p820).
Others
  • Pneumonia (p816).
  • Chest wall pain:
  • Muscular.
  • Rib fractures.
  • Bony metastases.
  • Costochondritis.

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

  • Gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux (p254).
  • Pleurisy (p166).
  • Empyema (p170).
  • Pericarditis (p154).
  • Oesophageal spasm (p250).
  • Herpes zoster (p404).
  • Cervical spondylosis (p508).
  • Intra-abdominal:

  • Cholecystitis (p634).
  • Peptic ulceration (p252).
  • Pancreatitis (p270).
  • Sickle-cell crisis (p340).
Before discharging patients with undiagnosed chest pain, be sure in your own mind 
that the pain is not cardiac (this pain is usually dull, may radiate to jaw, arm, or 
epigastrium, and is usually associated with exertion). Carry out key investigations 
and discuss options with a colleague, and the patient. Safety-net, telling the patient 
to return or seek advice if they develop worrying features (specify these) or the pain 
does not settle.
Key investigations
  • CXR.
  • ECG.
  • FBC, U&E, and troponin (p118). Consider D-dimer only if low probability of venous 

thromboembolism. See 'Modiﬁ ed Wells' score for PE, p191.

Just because the patient’s chest wall is tender to palpation, this doesn’t mean the 
cause of the chest pain is musculoskeletal. Even if palpation reproduces the same 
type of pain, ensure that you exclude all potential life-threatening causes. Although 
chest wall tenderness has discriminatory value against cardiac pain, it may be a 
feature of a pulmonary embolism. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   784

_OHCM_10e.indb   784

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

785

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   785

_OHCM_10e.indb   785

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

786

Coma

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Deﬁ nition Unrousable unresponsiveness. Quantify using Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS).
Causes of impaired conscious level/coma
Metabolic:
  • Drugs, poisoning, eg carbon monoxide, alcohol, tricyclics.
  • Hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia (ketoacidotic, or HONK, pp832–4).
  • Hypoxia, CO2 narcosis (COPD).
  • Septicaemia (p792).
  • Hypothermia.
  • Myxoedema (p834), Addisonian crisis (p836).
  • Hepatic/uraemic encephalopathy (pp275, 298).
Neurological:
  • Trauma.
  • Infection: meningitis (p822); encephalitis (eg herpes simplex—p404), tropical: ma-

laria (p416; do thick ﬁ lms), typhoid, typhus, rabies, trypanosomiasis.

  • Tumour: 1° or 2° (p528).
  • Vascular:  stroke  (p470),  subdural  (p482),  subarachnoid  (p478),  hypertensive  en-

cephalopathy (p140).

  • Epilepsy: non-convulsive status (p484) or post-ictal state.
Immediate management See ﬁ g 19.2 (and coma CNS exam, p789).
  • Assess Airway, Breathing, and Circulation. Consider intubation if GCS <8 (p788). Sup-
port the circulation if required (ie IV ﬂ uids). Give O2 and treat any seizures. Protect 
the cervical spine unless trauma is known not to be the cause.

  • Check blood glucose; give eg 200mL 10% glucose IV stat if hypoglycaemia possible.
  • IV thiamine if any suggestion of Wernicke’s encephalopathy; see later in topic.
  • IV naloxone (0.4–2mg  IV) for opiate intoxication (may also be given IM or via  ET 
tube);  IV ﬂ umazenil (p842) for benzodiazepine intoxication only if airway comp-
romised as risk of seizures especially if concomitant tricyclic intoxication.
Examination Vital signs are vital—obtain full set, including temperature.
  • Signs of trauma—haematoma, laceration, bruising, CSF/blood in nose or ears, frac-

ture ‘step’ deformity of skull, subcutaneous emphysema, ‘panda eyes’.

  • Stigmata of other illnesses: liver disease, alcoholism, diabetes, myxoedema.
  • Skin for needle marks, cyanosis, pallor, rash (meningitis; typhus), poor turgor.
  • Smell the breath (alcohol, hepatic fetor, ketosis, uraemia).
  • Opisthotonus (ﬁ g 9.45, p436) ≈meningitis or tetanus. Decerebrate/decorticate (p788)?
  • Meningism (pp456, 822) but do not move neck unless cervical spine is cleared.
  • Pupils (p789) size, reactivity, gaze.
  • Heart/lung exam for BP, murmurs, rubs, wheeze, consolidation, collapse.
  • Abdomen/rectal for organomegaly, ascites, bruising, peritonism, melaena.
  • Are there any foci of infection (abscesses, bites, middle ear infection)?
  • Any features of meningitis: neck stiff ness, rash, focal neurology?
  • Note the absence of signs, eg no pin-point pupils in a known heroin addict.
Quick history From family, ambulance staff , bystanders: abrupt or gradual onset? 
How found—suicide note, seizure? If injured, suspect cervical spinal injury and do not 
move spine (OHCS p782). Recent complaints—headache, fever, vertigo, depression? 
Recent medical history—sinusitis, otitis, neurosurgery, ENT procedure? Past medical 
history—diabetes, asthma, BP, cancer, epilepsy, psychiatric illness? Drug or toxin 
exposure (especially alcohol or other recreational drugs)? Any travel?
If the diagnosis is unclear:
  • Treat the treatable: O 2; naloxone as above; glucose (eg 200mL of 10% IV); Pabrinex® 
IV for Wernicke’s encephalopathy, p714; septic speciﬁ cs: cefotaxime 2g/12h IV (men-
ingitis, p822), artemether/quinine (malaria, p418), aciclovir (encephalitis, p824).

  • Do routine biochemistry, haematology, thick ﬁ lms, blood cultures, blood ethanol, 

drug screen, etc.

  • Arrange urgent CT head, if normal, and no CI, proceed to LP.
The diagnosis should now be clear, eg hypo/hyperglycaemia; alcohol excess; poison-
ing; uraemia; pneumonia; subarachnoid; hypertensive/hepatic encephalopathy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   786

_OHCM_10e.indb   786

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

787

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

  Managing coma

ABC of life support

IV access

Stabilize the cervical spine (vital if trauma is a possibility)

Blood glucose (ﬁ ngerprick & lab)

Control seizures

Treat potential causes, eg IV glucose, thiamine, naloxone 
(if pupils small or if possible narcotic use). Other antidotes: see p842

Brief collateral history & examination. Get details later

Investigations
  • ABG, FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP, ethanol, toxin screen, drug levels
  • Blood cultures, urine culture, consider malaria
  • CXR, CT head

Reassess the situation and plan further investigations

Fig 19.2 Managing coma. NB: check pupils every few minutes during the early stages, 
particularly if trauma is the likely cause. Doing so is the quickest way to ﬁ nd a lo-
calizing sign (so helpful in diagnosis, but remember that false localizing signs do 
occur)—and observing changes in pupil behaviour (eg becoming ﬁ xed and dilated) is 
the quickest way of ﬁ nding out just how bad things are.

_OHCM_10e.indb   787

_OHCM_10e.indb   787

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

788

The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)

This gives a reliable, objective way of recording the conscious state of a person. It can 
be used by medical and nursing staff  for initial and continuing assessment. It has val-
ue in predicting ultimate outcome. Three types of response are assessed, note in each 
case the best response (or best of any limb) which should be recorded (table 19.1).
Table 19.1  The Glasgow Coma Scale
  Best motor response
6 Obeying commands

Best verbal response
5 Oriented (time, place, 

Eye opening
4 Spontaneous

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

person)

5 Localizing to pain

4 Confused conversation

3 In response to speech

4 Withdrawing to pain
3 Flexor response to pain
2 Extensor response to pain
1 No response to pain

3 Inappropriate speech
2 Incomprehensible sounds 1 None
1 None

2 In response to pain

Adapted from 'Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness: a practical scale', Graham Teasdale and 
Bryan Jennett, The Lancet, Vol 304, No. 7872, 81–84 (1974), Elsevier.

An overall score is made by summing the score in the three areas assessed.
  • No response to pain + no verbalization + no eye opening = 3.
  • Severe injury, GCS ≤8—consider airway protection.
  • Moderate injury, GCS 9–12.
  • Minor injury, GCS 13–15.
Causing pain is not a pleasant thing, there are acceptable and unacceptable meth-
ods. Try ﬁ ngernail bed pressure with a pen/pencil, sternal pressure (not a rub), or 
suprascapular squeeze. Abnormal responses to pain can help to localize the damage:
  • Flexion = decorticate posture (arms bent inwards on chest, thumbs tucked in a 
clenched ﬁ st, legs extended) implies damage above the level of the red nucleus in 
the midbrain.1

  • Extension = decerebrate posture (adduction and internal rotation of shoulder, pro-
nation of forearm) indicates midbrain damage below the level of the red nucleus.
NB: an abbreviated coma scale, AVPU, is sometimes used in the initial assessment 
(‘primary survey’) of the critically ill:
A = alert
V = responds to vocal stimuli
P = responds to pain
U = unresponsive
NB: GCS scoring is diff erent in young children; see OHCS p201.

1  Red nucleus output reinforces upper limb antigravity ﬂ exion. When its output is damaged, the unregu-
lated reticulospinal and vestibulospinal tracts reinforce extension tone of upper and lower limbs.
The Glasgow Coma Scale is reproduced from The Lancet, Vol. 304, Teasdale G & Jennet B, Assessment of 
Coma and Impaired Consciousness: A Practical Scale, ©1974, with permission from Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   788

_OHCM_10e.indb   788

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

The neurological examination in coma
This is aimed at locating the pathology in one of two places. Altered level of con-
sciousness implies either:

1      A diff use, bilateral, cortical dysfunction (usually producing loss of awareness 

789

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

with normal arousal), or

2      Damage to the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) located through-
out the brainstem from the medulla to the thalami (usually producing loss of 
arousal with unassessable awareness). The brainstem can be aff ected directly 
(eg pontine haemorrhage) or indirectly (eg compression from transtentorial 
or cerebellar herniation secondary to a mass or oedema).

Systematic examination:
  • Level of consciousness; describe using objective words/AVPU.
  • Respiratory pattern (p53)—Cheyne-Stokes (brainstem lesions or compression) 
hyperventilation (acidosis, hypoxia, or, rarely, neurogenic), ataxic or apneustic 
(breath-holding) breathing (brainstem damage with grave prognosis).

  • Eyes—almost all patients with ARAS pathology will have eye ﬁ ndings:

1      Visual ﬁ elds—in light coma, test ﬁ elds with visual threat. No blink in one ﬁ eld 

suggests hemianopia and contralateral hemisphere lesion.

2      Pupils—normal  direct  and  consensual  reﬂ exes  present  =  intact  midbrain. 
Midposition (3–5mm) non-reactive ± irregular = midbrain lesion. Unilateral 
dilated and unreactive (‘ﬁ xed’) = 3rd nerve compression. Small, reactive = 
pontine lesion (‘pin-point pontine pupils’) or drugs. Horner’s syndrome (p702, 
ﬁ g 15.4) = ipsilateral lateral medulla or hypothalamus lesion, may precede 
uncal herniation. Beware patients with false eyes or who use eye drops for 
glaucoma.

3      Extraocular movements (EOMS)—observe resting position and spontaneous 
movement; then test the vestibulo-ocular reﬂ ex (VOR) with either the doll’s-
head manoeuvre (normal if the eyes keep looking at the same point in space 
when the head is quickly moved laterally or vertically) or ice water calorics 
(normal if eyes deviate towards the cold ear with nystagmus to the other 
side). If present, the VOR exonerates most of the brainstem from the VIIth 
nerve nucleus (medulla) to the IIIrd (midbrain). Don’t move the head unless 
the cervical spine is cleared.

4      Fundi—papilloedema,  subhyaloid  haemorrhage,  hypertensive  retinopathy, 

signs of other disease (eg diabetic retinopathy).

  • Examine for CNS asymmetry (tone, spontaneous movements, reﬂ exes). One way 
to test for hemiplegia in coma is to raise both arms together and compare how 
they fall under gravity. If one descends fast, like a lead weight, but the other 
descends more gracefully, you have found a valuable focal sign of cortical dys-
function. The same applies to the legs.

Reproduced from 'Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness: a practical scale', Graham Teasdale 
and Bryan Jennett, The Lancet, Vol 304, No. 7872, 81–84 (1974), Elsevier.

_OHCM_10e.indb   789

_OHCM_10e.indb   789

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

790

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Shock
Circulatory failure resulting in inadequate organ perfusion. Often deﬁ ned by BP—
systolic <90mmHg—or mean arterial pressure (MAP) <65mmHg—with evidence of 
tissue  hypoperfusion,  eg  mottled  skin,  urine  output  (UO)  of  <0.5mL/kg/h,  serum 
lactate >2mmol/L. Signs: GCS/agitation, pallor, cool peripheries, tachycardia, slow 
capillary reﬁ ll, tachypnoea, oliguria.
MAP = cardiac output (CO) ≈ systemic vascular resistance (SVR).
CO = stroke volume ≈ heart rate.
  shock can result from inadequate CO or a loss of SVR, or both.
Inadequate cardiac output
  • Hypovolaemia:

  • Bleeding: trauma, ruptured aortic aneurysm, GI bleed.
  • Fluid loss: vomiting, burns, ‘third-space’ losses, eg pancreatitis, heat exhaustion.

  • Pump failure:

  • Cardiogenic shock, eg ACS, arrhythmias, aortic dissection, acute valve failure.
  • Secondary causes, eg PE, tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade.

Peripheral circulatory failure (loss of SVR)
  • Sepsis:  (p792)  Infection  with  any  organism  can  cause  acute  vasodilation  from 
inﬂ ammatory cytokines. Gram –ves can produce endotoxin, causing sudden and 
severe shock but without signs of infection (fever,  WCC). Classically patients with 
sepsis are warm & vasodilated, but may be cold & shut down. Other diseases, eg 
pancreatitis, can give a similar picture associated with the inﬂ ammatory cascade.

  • Anaphylaxis: p794.
  • Neurogenic: Eg spinal cord injury, epidural or spinal anaesthesia.
  • Endocrine failure: Addison’s disease, p836 or hypothyroidism; see p834.
  • Other: Drugs, eg anaesthetics, antihypertensives, cyanide poisoning.
Assessment ABCDE (p779). With shock we are dealing primarily with ‘C ’ so get 
large-bore IV access ≈2 and check ECG for rate, rhythm (very fast or very slow will 
compromise cardiac output), and signs of ischaemia.
  • General review: Cold and clammy suggests cardiogenic shock or ﬂ uid loss. Look 
for signs of anaemia or dehydration, eg skin turgor, postural hypotension? Warm 
and well perfused, with bounding pulse points to septic shock. Any features sug-
gestive of anaphylaxis—history, urticaria, angioedema, wheeze?

  • CVS: Usually tachycardic (unless on -blocker, or in spinal shock—OHCS p757) and 
hypotensive. But in the young and ﬁ t, or pregnant women, the systolic  BP may 
remain  normal,  although  the  pulse  pressure  will  narrow,  with  up  to  30%  blood 
volume depletion. Diff erence between arms (>20mmHg)—aortic dissection (p655)?

  • JVP or central venous pressure: If raised, cardiogenic shock likely.
  • Check abdomen: Any signs of trauma, or aneurysm? Any evidence of GI bleed?
Management If BP unrecordable, call the cardiac arrest team.
  • Septic shock: See p792.
  • Anaphylaxis: See p794.
  • Cardiogenic shock: See p802.
  • Hypovolaemic shock: Identify and treat underlying cause. Raise the legs.

  • Give ﬂ uid bolus 10–15mL/kg crystalloid via large peripheral line, if shock improves, 

repeat, titrate to HR (aim <100), BP (aim SBP >90) and UO (aim >0.5mL/kg/h).

  • If no improvement after 2 boluses, consider referral to ICU.

  • Haemorrhagic shock: Stop bleeding if possible. See table 19.2 for grading.

  • If still shocked despite 2L crystalloid or present with class III/IV shock then 

crossmatch blood (request O Rh–ve in an emergency, see p348).

  • Give FFP with red cells (1 : 1 ratio); aim for platelets >100 and ﬁ brinogen >1 (guided 
by results, but eg 1 pool of platelets and 2 pools of cryoprecipitate per 6–8 units 
of red cells). Consider tranexamic acid 2g IV. Discuss with haematology early.

  • Heat exposure (heat exhaustion):

  • Tepid sponging + fanning; avoid ice and immersion. Resuscitate with IVI, eg 0.9% 
saline ± hydrocortisone 100mg IV. Lorazepam 1–2mg IV or chlorpromazine 25mg 
IM/IV may be used to stop shivering. Stop cooling when core temperature <39°C.

_OHCM_10e.indb   790

_OHCM_10e.indb   790

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Table 19.2  Categorizing shock
  Class of shock
Blood loss (estimated mL 
or % of circulating vol)
Heart rate
Systolic BP
Pulse pressure

1
<750mL or 
<15% 
<100bpm
Normal
Normal

2
750–1500mL 
15–30%
>100bpm
Normal
Narrow

4
>2000mL 
>40%

3
1500–2000mL 
30–40%
120–140bpm >140bpm
Low
Narrow

Capillary reﬁ ll
Respiratory rate
Urine output

Cerebral function

Normal
14–20/min
>30mL/h

>2 seconds
20–30/min
20–30mL/h

>2 seconds
>30/min
5–20mL/h

Normal/
anxious

Anxious/
hostile

Anxious/
confused

Confused/unre-
sponsive

Unrecordable
V narrow/
absent
Absent
>35/min
Negligible

791

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   791

_OHCM_10e.indb   791

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

792

Sepsis

Sepsis is a major killer. There are >150 000 cases of sepsis in the UK each year result-
ing in >44 000 deaths, and much morbidity.
Sepsis Life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response 
to infection.
Septic shock Sepsis in combination with:
  • EITHER lactate >2mmol/L despite adequate ﬂ uid resuscitation
  • OR the patient is requiring vasopressors to maintain MAP ≥65mmHg.
 Sepsis recognition
Many sepsis-related deaths could be prevented with earlier treatment. Often, the 
key failure in sepsis management is not recognizing sepsis in time. Early warning 
scores (p892, ﬁ g A1) help identify inpatients who are becoming septic.
Have a low threshold for assessing for sepsis if:
  • the patient has communication diffi  culties: limited English; limited verbal com-

munication; cognitive impairment

  • the patient is immunosuppressed, on chemotherapy, or an IV drug user
  • the patient recently had surgery or is pregnant/recently gave birth
  • the patient has indwelling lines/other foreign material.

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

  Assessing risk in sepsis
Table 19.3  Risk criteria in sepsis
  Moderate- to high-risk criteria
Reports of altered mental state or acute 
deterioration in functional status
Respiratory rate (RR) 21–24

High-risk criteria
Objective evidence of altered mental 
state
RR>24; new requirement for FiO2 >40% 
to keep sats >92% (>88% in COPD)
SBP <90 or >40mmHg less than baseline
Heart rate >130bpm
Urine output: nil for 18h; <0.5mL/kg/h if 
catheterized
Mottled, ashen, or cyanotic skin. Non-
blanching rash (p822)

Systolic blood pressure (SBP) 91–100mmHg
Heart rate 91–130bpm or new arrhythmia
Urine output: nil for 12–18h; 0.5–1.0mL/kg/h 
if catheterized
Local signs of infection, incl. redness, swell-
ing, or discharge around wound
Rigors, or temperature <36°C
Impaired immunity (illness or drugs)
Recent surgery/trauma/invasive procedure
When there is a suspicion of sepsis, the criteria in table 19.3 are used to assess the 
patient’s risk of death or serious illness from sepsis as follows:
High risk: At least one high-risk criterion OR at least two moderate- to high-risk 
criteria with AKI or LACTATE >2.
Moderate to high risk: At least one moderate- to high-risk criterion.
Low risk: No moderate- or high-risk criteria.

Acute management in sepsis Early recognition and treatment is key. See ﬁ g 19.3.2
Antibiotics: These should be broad spectrum and start within 1h. Consider covering 
for non-bacterial microbes, eg give aciclovir if HSV encephalitis is suspected.
Fluids: Give within 1h if high risk with SBP <90, AKI, or lactate >2 (consider if <2).
  • Give 500mL boluses of crystalloids with 130–154mmol/L sodium (eg 0.9% saline) 

over 15mins. Caution in heart failure.

  • If no improvement after two boluses, speak with a senior.
Oxygen: Give oxygen as required for target saturations. These will be 94–98% (or 
88–92% if the patient is at risk of CO2 retention, eg in severe COPD).
Critical  care  review: Speak with critical care early if intensive care support (eg 
inotropes, ventilation, haemoﬁ ltration, intensive monitoring) may be required.
Surgical involvement: Eg emergency wound debridement.
Manage acute complications: Shock (p790), AKI (p298), DIC (p352), ARDS (p186), ar-
rhythmias (may spontaneously resolve when sepsis improves).

_OHCM_10e.indb   792

_OHCM_10e.indb   792

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
793

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

  Acute management of sepsis in adults

Recognize the need to assess for sepsis
  • Consider possibility of sepsis in any patient with signs or symptoms 
that are suggestive of infection (eg productive cough or off ensive 
oozing wound)

  • Consider non-speciﬁ c signs (patient/carer concern; altered mental 
state; feeling generally unwell), particularly when there is reason to 
have low threshold for sepsis assessment (see BOX)

Gather information

History: Full medical history: take time to clarify the time course of symp-
toms and any travel history
Examination:
  • General: capillary reﬁ ll time, mottled/ashen skin, conscious level
  • Localize source of infection: don’t forget to assess wounds/ulcers which may 

be hidden by dressings

Bedside tests: Blood gas for lactate, observations incl. HR, BP, RR, sats, tem-
perature; ECG; urine dip and urine output monitoring

Assess risk (see BOX)

High risk
Request immediate 
senior review

Moderate to high risk
Clinician review within 1h.
Senior review within 3h if 
cause not identiﬁ ed

Low risk
Manage according to 
clinical judgement

Investigations
Blood tests: Serial ABGS, or VBGS for lactate; blood cultures; U&E, CRP, 
FBC, LFT, clotting screen
Micro samples: Sputum and urine for MC&S; swab any wounds; con-
sider LP; send ﬂ uid from drains and lines; joint aspirates; ascitic tap
Imaging: CXR, consider CT/USS/MRI/echo of suspected source

Treatment
Antibiotics ± other antimicrobials
Fluids
Oxygen
Liaise with other teams
  • Critical care, surgeons, medical specialties
Manage acute complications

Review
Immediately alert a consultant if, after 1h of antibiotics and ﬂ uids:
  • SBP <90  •RR >30  •Reduced GCS
  • Raised lactate not reduced by >20%
Consider critical care referral.

Fig 19.3  Management of sepsis in adults.

_OHCM_10e.indb   793

_OHCM_10e.indb   793

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

794

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Anaphylactic shock
Type I IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. Release of histamine and other agents 
causes: capillary leak; wheeze; cyanosis; oedema (larynx, lids, tongue, lips); urticaria. 
More common in atopic individuals. An anaphylactoid reaction results from direct 
release of mediators from inﬂ ammatory cells, without involving antibodies, usually 
in response to a drug, eg acetylcysteine.
Examples of precipitants
  • Drugs, eg penicillin, and contrast media in radiology.
  • Latex.
  • Stings, eggs, ﬁ sh, peanuts, strawberries, semen (rare).
Signs and symptoms
  • Itching, sweating, diarrhoea and vomiting, erythema, urticaria, oedema.
  • Wheeze, laryngeal obstruction, cyanosis.
  • Tachycardia, hypotension.
Mimics of anaphylaxis
  • Carcinoid (p271).
  • Phaeochromocytoma (p228, p837).
  • Systemic mastocytosis.
  • Hereditary angioedema.
Management See ﬁ g 19.4. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   794

_OHCM_10e.indb   794

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of anaphylaxis

795

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Secure the airway—give 100% O2
Intubate if respiratory obstruction imminent

Remove the cause; raising the feet 
may help restore the circulation

Give adrenaline IM 0.5mg (ie 0.5mL of 1:1000).
Repeat every 5min, if needed as guided by BP, pulse, 
and respiratory function, until better

Secure IV access

Chlorphenamine 10mg IV and 
hydrocortisone 200mg IV

IVI (0.9% saline, eg 500mL over ¼h; up to 2L may be needed)
Titrate against blood pressure

If wheeze, treat for asthma (p810)
May require ventilatory support

If still hypotensive, admission to ICU and an IVI of adrena-
line may be needed ± aminophylline (p811) and nebulized 
salbutamol (p811): get expert help

Further management:

  • Admit to ward. Monitor ECG
  • Measure serum tryptase 1–6h after suspected anaphylaxis
  • Continue chlorphenamine 4mg/6h PO if itching
  • Suggest a ‘MedicAlert’ bracelet naming the culprit allergen
  • Teach about self-injected adrenaline (eg 0.3mg, Epipen®) to 

prevent a fatal attack

  • Skin-prick tests showing speciﬁ c IgE help identify allergens

to avoid

Fig 19.4 Management of anaphylaxis.
Adrenaline (=epinephrine) is given IM and NOT IV unless the patient is severely ill, 
or has no pulse. The IV dose is different: 100mcg/min—titrating with the response. 
This is 0.5mL of 1 : 10 000 solution IV per minute. Stop as soon as a response has been 
obtained.
If on a -blocker, consider salbutamol IV in place of adrenaline.

_OHCM_10e.indb   795

_OHCM_10e.indb   795

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

796

Acute coronary syndrome—with ST-elevation

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) includes unstable angina, STEMI, and NSTEMI (p798). 
STEMI is a common medical emergency; prompt appropriate treatment saves lives.3
Initial treatment See ﬁ g 19.5. Take brief history, do a quick physical examination 
and a 12-lead ECG. Observe on cardiac monitor or telemetry in case of dysrhythmia. 
Other tests on admission: U&E, troponin, glucose, cholesterol, FBC, CXR.
  • Aspirin: 300mg PO (if not already given); consider ticagrelor (180mg PO) or prasug-
rel (60mg PO if no history of stroke/TIA and <75yrs) as newer alternatives to clopi-
dogrel (300mg PO) as they have been shown to be superior in outcome studies.

  • Morphine: 5–10mg IV (repeat after 5min if necessary). Give anti-emetic with the 1st 
dose of morphine: metoclopramide 10mg IV (1st line), or cyclizine 50mg IV (2nd line).
  • GTN: routine use now not recommended in the acute setting unless patient is hyper-

tensive or in acute LVF. Useful as anti-anginal in chronic/stable patients.

  • Oxygen is recommended if patients have SaO2 <95%, are breathless or in acute LVF.
  • Restore coronary perfusion in those presenting <12h after symptom onset (see BOX).
  • Anticoagulation: An injectable anticoagulant must be used in primary PCI. Bivali-

rudin is preferred, if not available use enoxaparin ± a GP IIb/IIIa blocker.

  • ß-blockers provide additional beneﬁ t when started early, eg bisoprolol 2.5mg PO OD. 
Ensure no evidence of cardiogenic shock, heart failure, asthma/COPD, or heart block.
Right ventricular infarction Conﬁ rm by demonstrating ST elevation in rV3/4 and/
or echo.  NB: rV4 means that  V4 is placed in the right 5th intercostal space in the 
midclavicular line. Treat hypotension and oliguria with ﬂ uids (avoid nitrates and diu-
retics). Monitor BP carefully, and assess early signs of pulmonary oedema. Intensive 
monitoring and inotropes may be useful in some patients.

 Reperfusion therapy
Early coronary reperfusion saves lives; decisions must be taken quickly so seek 
senior advice early. Look for typical clinical symptoms of MI plus ECG criteria:
  • ST elevation >1mm in ≥2 adjacent limb leads or >2mm in ≥2 adjacent chest leads.
  • LBBB (unless known to have LBBB previously).
  • Posterior changes: deep ST depression and tall R waves in leads V1 to V3.
Therapy may be percutaneous intervention (PCI—with angiographic identiﬁ cation of 
the culprit blockage(s) and revascularization via deployment of an expandable met-
al stent) or thrombolysis (with systemically administered clot-dissolving enzymes):
  • Primary PCI: Should be off ered to all patients presenting within 12h of symptom 
onset with a STEMI who either are at or can be transferred to a primary PCI cen-
tre within 120min of ﬁ rst medical contact. If this is not possible, patients should 
receive thrombolysis and be transferred to a primary PCI centre after the infusion 
for either rescue PCI (if residual ST elevation) or angiography (if successful). Use 
beyond 12h if evidence of ongoing ischaemia or in stable patients presenting after 
12–24h may be appropriate—seek specialist advice.

  • Thrombolysis:  Beneﬁ t  reduces  steadily  from  onset  of  pain,  target  time  is 
<30min from admission; use >12h from symptom onset requires specialist advice. 
Do not thrombolyse ST depression alone, T-wave inversion alone, or normal ECG. 
Thrombolysis  is  best  achieved  with  tissue  plasminogen  activators  (eg  tenect-
eplase as a single IV bolus). CI: •Previous intracranial haemorrhage. •Ischaemic 
stroke <6months. •Cerebral malignancy or AVM. •Recent major trauma/surgery/
head injury (<3wks). •GI bleeding (<1 month). •Known bleeding disorder. •Aortic 
dissection. •Non-compressible punctures <24h, eg liver biopsy, lumbar puncture. 
Relative CI: •TIA <6 months. •Anticoagulant therapy. •Pregnancy/<1wk post par-
tum. •Refractory hypertension (>180mmHg/110mmHg). •Advanced liver disease. 
•Infective endocarditis. •Active peptic ulcer. •Prolonged/traumatic resuscitation.
Patients with STEMI who do not receive reperfusion (eg presenting >12h after 
symptom onset) should be treated with fondaparinux, or enoxaparin/unfraction-
ated heparin if not available. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   796

_OHCM_10e.indb   796

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of an acute STEMI

797

Attach ECG monitor and record a 12-lead ECG

IV access.
Bloods for FBC, U&E, glucose, lipids, troponin (p119, ﬁ g 3.22)

Brief assessment:
  • History of cardiovascular disease; risk factors for IHD
  • Examination: pulse,  BP (both arms),  JVP, murmurs, signs of  CCF, upper 
limb pulses, scars from previous cardiac surgery, CXR if will not delay 
  • Contraindications to PCI or ﬁ brinolysis?

Aspirin: 300mg (unless already given by GP/paramedics)
Ticagrelor: 180mg (or alternative antiplatelet—see ‘Aspirin’ in text)

Morphine: 5–10mg IV + anti-emetic, eg metoclopramide 10mg IV

STEMI on ECG and PCI available within 120min?

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Yes

Primary PCI

No

Fibrinolysis

Transfer to primary PCI 
centre for either rescue PCI 
if ﬁ brinolysis unsuccessful 
or for angiography

For further management see p120

Fig 19.5  Management of an acute STEMI.

_OHCM_10e.indb   797

_OHCM_10e.indb   797

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

798

Acute coronary syndrome—without ST-elevation

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

First stabilize with medical therapy; early risk stratiﬁ cation will identify those in 
need of further treatment and prompt angiography (involve cardiologists).4
Assessment
Brief history: (See p36.) Previous angina, relief with rest/nitrates, history of cardio-
vascular disease, risk factors for IHD.
Examination: (See p38.) Pulse, BP, JVP, cardiac murmurs, signs of heart failure, pe-
ripheral pulses, scars from previous cardiac surgery.
Investigations ECG: ST depression; ﬂ at or inverted T-waves; or normal; FBC, U&E, tro-
ponin, glucose, random cholesterol; CXR.
Management See ﬁ g 19.6 for acute management, but p796 if ST elevation. The aim 
of therapy is to control pain then initiate anti-ischaemic and antiplatelet therapy.
Oral antiplatelet therapy: Aspirin 300mg PO, followed by 75mg OD. For those with 
conﬁ rmed ACS give a second antiplatelet agent, eg clopidogrel (300mg PO then 75mg 
OD PO). Ticagrelor (180mg then 90mg/12h PO) is a prefered alternative, particularly in 
higher risk groups5 (eg • ≥60yrs age •previous stroke, TIA, MI, or CABG •known coro-
nary artery stenosis ≥50% in ≥2 vessels or carotid stenosis ≥50% •DM •peripheral 
arterial  disease  •chronic  kidney  disease).  Prasugrel  (60mg  then  10mg/d  PO)  is  an 
alternative to clopidogrel for those undergoing PCI. In practice, if the history is typi-
cal but ECG changes are non-diagnostic and troponin results are awaited, treatment 
with eg clopridogrel is often given on clinical suspicion; if troponin testing then con-
ﬁ rms ACS, it is still appropriate to give either ticagrelor or prasugrel to those patients 
in whom it is indicated, even if clopidogrel has already been given.
Anticoagulation: Ideally fondaparinux (factor Xa inhibitor) 2.5mg OD; if not avail-
able, use low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH, eg enoxaparin 1mg/kg/12h) or un-
fractionated heparin (aim APTT 50–70s) until discharge.
ß-blockers:  In  higher-risk  patients  with  no  contraindications  (consider  diltiazem 
as alternative). Do not use -blockers with verapamil—can precipitate asystole.
Nitrates (PO or IV): For recurrent chest pain.
ACE-i: Should be given to all patients unless there are CI (monitor renal function).
Lipid management: Start early, eg atorvastatin 80mg OD (see p120).
Prognosis Overall risk of death ~1–2%, but ~15% for refractory angina despite medi-
cal therapy. Risk stratiﬁ cation can help predict those most at risk and allow interven-
tion to be targeted at those individuals: calculate using GRACE score.2 The following 
are associated with an increased risk:
  • History of unstable angina.
  • ST depression or widespread T-wave inversion.
  • Raised troponin (except patients with ST elevation MI).
  • Age >70 years.
  • General comorbidity, previous MI, poor LV function or DM.
High-risk patients should be considered for inpatient coronary angiography. Symp-
tomatic lesions may be addressed by coronary stenting or CABG (see p123).
Further measures
  • Wean off  glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) infusion when stabilized on oral drugs.
  • Continue fondaparinux (or LMWH or heparin) until discharge.
  • Observe on cardiac monitor or telemetry in case of dysrhythmia. Check serial ECGS, 

and troponin >12h after pain.

  • Address modiﬁ able risk factors: smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes.
  • Gentle mobilization.
  • Ensure patient on dual antiplatelet therapy, -blocker, ACE inhibitor, and statin.
If symptoms recur, refer to cardiologist for urgent angiography & PCI or CABG.

2  GRACE  =  Global  Registry  of  Acute  Coronary  Events.  Risk  is  scored  based  on  age,  heart  rate,  BP,  re-
nal  function,  Killip  class  of  heart  failure,  and  other  events,  eg  raised  troponin.  Very  complicated 
to  calculate  so  recommendation  by  European  Society  of  Cardiology  is  to  use  an  online  calculator, 
eg http://www.outcomes-umassmed.org/grace/.

_OHCM_10e.indb   798

_OHCM_10e.indb   798

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Acute management of cardiac chest pain

799

Monitor closely; record ECG while in pain

If SaO2 <90% or breathless, low-ﬂ ow O2

Analgesia: Eg morphine 5–10mg IV + metoclopramide 10mg IV

Nitrates: GTN spray or sublingual tablets as required

Aspirin: 300mg PO. 
Consider need for second antiplatelet agent (see ‘Oral antiplatelet therapy’ in text)

Measure troponin and clinical 
parameters to risk assess, 
eg GRACE score2

Invasive strategy (high-risk pt):

  • Rise in troponin OR:
  • Dynamic ST or T–wave changes
  • Secondary criteria—diabetes, CKD, 
LVEF <40%, early angina post MI, 
recent PCI, prior CABG, intermedi-
ate to high-risk GRACE score

Conservative strategy (low-risk pt):
  • No recurrence of chest pain
  • No signs of heart failure
  • Normal ECG
  • —ve baseline (± repeat) troponin
May  be  discharged  (check  troponin 
interval required with your laboratory 
and  retest  after  delay  if  necessary). 
Arrange further outpatient investiga-
tion, eg stress test.

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Fondaparinux: 2.5mg OD SC or LMWH 1mg/kg/12h SC

Second antiplatelet agent (see text), eg 
ticagrelor 180mg PO (or clopidogrel 300mg PO in 
lower risk, or prasugrel 60mg OD if proceeding to PCI)

IV nitrate if pain continues
(eg GTN 50mg in 50mL 0.9% saline at 2–10mL/h)
titrate to pain, and maintain systolic BP >100mmHg

Oral -blocker, eg bisoprolol 2.5mg OD
CI: cardiogenic shock, heart failure, asthma/COPD or heart 
block; consider rate-limiting calcium antagonist (eg 
verapamil 80–120mg/8h PO, or diltiazem 60–120mg/8h PO)

Prompt cardiologist review for angiography
1      Urgent (<120min after presentation) if ongoing 

angina and evolving ST changes, signs of cardiogenic 
shock or life-threatening arrhythmias

2      Early (<24h) if GRACE score >140 and high-risk patient
3      Within 72h if lower-risk patient

Fig 19.6  Acute management of chest pain and ACS without ST-segment elevation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   799

_OHCM_10e.indb   799

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

800

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Severe pulmonary oedema
Causes
  • Cardiovascular, usually left ventricular failure (post-MI or ischaemic heart disease). 

Also valvular heart disease, arrhythmias, and malignant hypertension.

  • ARDS (p186) from any cause, eg trauma, malaria, drugs. Look for predisposing fac-
tors, eg trauma, post-op, sepsis. Is aspirin overdose or glue-snifﬁ ng/drug abuse 
likely? Ask friends/relatives.

  • Fluid overload.
  • Neurogenic, eg head injury.
Diff  erential diagnosis Asthma/COPD, pneumonia, and pulmonary oedema are often 
hard to distinguish, especially in the elderly, where they may coexist. If the patient is 
extremely unwell and you are not sure, consider treating all three (eg with salbuta-
mol nebulizer, furosemide IV, diamorphine, amoxicillin—p386).
Symptoms Dyspnoea, orthopnoea (eg paroxysmal), pink frothy sputum.  NB: note 
drugs recently given and other illnesses (recent MI/COPD or pneumonia).
Signs Distressed, pale, sweaty, pulse, tachypnoea, pink frothy sputum, pulsus alter-
nans, JVP, ﬁ ne lung crackles, triple/gallop rhythm (p44), wheeze (cardiac asthma). 
Usually sitting up and leaning forward. Quickly examine for possible causes.
Investigations
  • CXR (p135, pp722–4): cardiomegaly, signs of pulmonary oedema: look for shadowing 
(usually bilateral), small eff usions at costophrenic angles, ﬂ uid in the lung ﬁ ssures, 
and Kerley B lines (septal linear opacities).

  • ECG: signs of MI, dysrhythmias.
  • U&E, troponin, ABG.
  • Consider echo.
  • BNP (p137) may be helpful if diagnosis in question (high negative predictive value).
Management See ﬁ g 19.7. Begin treatment before investigations.
Monitoring progress:  BP; pulse; cyanosis; respiratory rate; JVP; urine output; ABG. 
Observe on cardiac monitor or telemetry in case of dysrhythmia.
Once stable and improving:
  • Daily weights, aim reduction of 0.5kg/day, check obs at least QDS.
  • Repeat CXR.
  • Change to oral furosemide or bumetanide.
  • If on large doses of loop diuretic, consider the addition of a thiazide (eg bendroﬂ u-

methiazide or metolazone 2.5–5mg daily PO).

  • ACE-i if LVEF <40%. If ACE-i contraindicated, consider hydralazine and nitrate (may 

also be more eff ective in African-Caribbeans).

  • Also consider -blocker and spironolactone (if LVEF <35%).
  • Is the patient suitable for biventricular pacing or cardiac transplantation?
  • Optimize management of AF if present (p130); consider anticoagulation.

_OHCM_10e.indb   800

_OHCM_10e.indb   800

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of acute heart failure

801

Sit the patient upright

High-ﬂ ow oxygen if SpO2*

IV access and monitor ECG
Treat any arrhythmias, eg AF (pp124–31)

Investigations whilst continuing treatment
See p800

Diamorphine 1.25–5mg IV slowly
Caution in liver failure and COPD

Furosemide 40–80mg IV slowly
Larger doses required in renal failure

GTN spray 2 puff s SL or 2 ≈ 0.3mg tablets SL
Don’t give if systolic BP <90mmHg

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Necessary investigations, examination, and history

If systolic BP ≥100mmHg, start a nitrate infusion,
eg isosorbide dinitrate 2–10mg/h IVI; keep systolic BP ≥90mmHg

If the patient is worsening:

  • Further dose of furosemide 40–80mg
  • Consider CPAP—improves ventilation by recruiting more alveoli, driving ﬂ uid out 

of alveolar spaces and into vasculature (get help before initiating!)

  • Increase nitrate infusion if able to do so without dropping systolic BP <100mmHg
  • Consider alternative diagnoses, eg hypertensive heart failure, aortic dissection, 

pulmonary embolism, pneumonia

If systolic BP <100mmHg, treat as cardiogenic shock (p802) and refer to ICU

*Avoid supplemental oxygen if not hypoxaemic since may cause vasoconstriction and reduce cardiac out-
put. If known COPD, hypoxaemia still needs correcting; give high-ﬂ ow oxygen but monitor closely for CO2 
retention (check serial ABG if needed) and reduce ﬂ ow as soon as possible.
Fig 19.7  Management of heart failure.

_OHCM_10e.indb   801

_OHCM_10e.indb   801

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

802

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Cardiogenic shock
This has a high mortality and is very diffi  cult to treat. Ask a senior physician’s help 
both in formulating an exact diagnosis and in guiding treatment.
Cardiogenic shock is a state of inadequate tissue perfusion primarily due to cardiac 
dysfunction. It may occur suddenly, or after progressively worsening heart failure.
Causes
  • Myocardial infarction (pp796–9).
  • Arrhythmias (pp124–31).
  • Pulmonary embolus (p818).
  • Tension pneumothorax (p814).
  • Cardiac tamponade (p154 and later in topic).
  • Myocarditis; myocardial depression (drugs, hypoxia, acidosis, sepsis) (p152).
  • Valve destruction (endocarditis—p150).
  • Aortic dissection (p655).
Management See ﬁ g 19.8.
If the cause is myocardial infarction prompt reperfusion therapy is vital (see p796).
  • Manage in Coronary Care Unit, or ICU.
  • Investigation and treatment may need to be done concurrently.
  • Investigations: ECG, U&E, troponin, ABG, CXR, echocardiogram. If indicated, CT thorax 
(speak with radiologists, this can be protocolled for both aortic dissection and PE) .
  • Monitor: CVP, BP, ABG, ECG, urine output. Keep on cardiac monitor/telemetry. Record 
a 12-lead ECG every hour until the diagnosis is made. Consider a CVP line and an arte-
rial line to monitor pressure, if these are in situ consider measuring cardiac output 
and volume status.3 Catheterize for accurate urine output.

Cardiac tamponade Pericardial ﬂ uid collects  intrapericardial pressure rises  
heart cannot ﬁ ll  pumping stops.
Causes: Trauma, lung/breast cancer, pericarditis, myocardial infarct, bacteria, eg 
TB. Rarely: urea, radiation, myxoedema, dissecting aorta, SLE. Also coronary artery 
dissection (secondary to PCI) and/or ruptured ventricle.
Signs: BP, JVP, and muffl  ed heart sounds (Beck’s triad); JVP on inspiration (Kuss-
maul’s sign); pulsus paradoxus (pulse fades on inspiration). Echocardiography may 
be diagnostic. CXR: globular heart; left heart border convex or straight; right cardio-
phrenic angle <90°. ECG: electrical alternans (p154).
Management: This can be very diffi  cult. Everything is against you: time, physiology, 
and your own conﬁ dence, as the patient may be too ill to give a history, and signs 
may be equivocal—but bitter experience has taught us not to equivocate for long.
Request the presence of your senior at the bedside (do not make do with telephone 
advice). With luck, prompt pericardiocentesis (p773) brings swift relief. While await-
ing this, give O2, monitor ECG, and set up IVI. Take blood for group & save. NB: there 
may be a role for cardiothoracic surgery (eg CABG, ventricular repair, or pericardial 
window) as a deﬁ nitive solution to some causes.

3  Eg Pulse contour cardiac output (PICCO) or lithium dilution cardiac output (LIDCO). Both use injection 
(PICCO = cold water, LIDCO = lithium) to estimate ﬁ lling pressure, extravascular water (ie pulmonary oedema) 
and cardiac output. The time from injection via a central vein to detection via an arterial line, plus dilution, 
gives estimates of cardiac output and volume status and can guide ﬂ uid and inotrope therapy.

_OHCM_10e.indb   802

_OHCM_10e.indb   802

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of cardiogenic shock

803

Oxygen
Titrate to maintain arterial saturations of 94–98% 
(88–92% if COPD)

Diamorphine 1.25–5mg IV for pain and anxiety

Investigations and close monitoring
(see p802)

Correct arrhythmias (pp124–31), U&E abnormalities,
or acid–base disturbance

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Optimize ﬁ lling pressure with clinical assessment of pulse, BP, JVP/
CVP (if in ICU consider using PICCO, LIDCO, transoesophageal doppler or 
Swan–Gantz catheter to estimate cardiac output and ﬂ uid balance)

Underﬁ lled?
Give a plasma expander
100mL every 15min IV
Aim MAP 70mmHg, CVP 8–10mmHg

Well/over-ﬁ lled?
Inotropic support, eg dobutamine 
2.5–10mcg/kg/min IVI. Aim MAP 
70mmHg

Look for and treat any reversible cause:
MI or PE—consider thrombolysis;
surgery for: acute VSD, mitral, or aortic incompetence

Fig 19.8  Management of cardiogenic shock. MAP = mean arterial pressure.

_OHCM_10e.indb   803

_OHCM_10e.indb   803

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

804

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Broad complex tachycardia
ECG shows rate of >100bpm and QRS complexes >120ms (>3 small squares on ECGS 
done at the standard UK rate of 25mm/s). Identify the underlying rhythm and treat 
accordingly.6
Diff  erential diagnosis (See p128.)
  • Ventricular  tachycardia  (VT)  including  torsade  de  pointes.  Single  ventricular 

ectopics should not cause confusion; if >3 together at a rate >100, this is VT.

  • SVT (p806) with aberrant conduction, eg AF or atrial ﬂ utter, with bundle branch block.
  • Pre-excited tachycardias, eg AF, atrial ﬂ utter, or AV re-entry tachycardia, with un-

derlying WPW (p133).

Identifying the underlying rhythm (See p128.) If in doubt, treat as VT.
Management See ﬁ g 19.9.6
  • Connect patient to a cardiac monitor and have a deﬁ brillator to hand.
  • Monitor O2 sats and if <90% give supplemental oxygen.
  • Correct electrolyte abnormalities, esp K+ and Mg2+.
  • Check  for  adverse  signs.  Low  cardiac  output  (clammy,  consciousness,  BP  <90); 

oliguria; angina; pulmonary oedema.

  • Obtain 12-lead ECG (request CXR) and obtain IV access.
If haemodynamically unstable VT: Synchronized DC shock (see p894, ﬁ g A3).
  • Correct any hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia: up to 60mmol KCl at 30mmol/h, 

and 4mL 50% magnesium sulfate over 30min both via central line.

  • Follow with amiodarone 300mg IV over 10–20min (peripherally only in emergency).
  • For refractory cases consider procainamide or sotalol.
If haemodynamically stable VT: Correct hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia: as above.
  • Amiodarone 300mg IV over 20–60min (avoid if long QT) via central line.
  • If this fails, use synchronized DC shock.
After correction of VT: Establish the cause (via the history and tests described above).
  • Maintenance anti-arrhythmic therapy may be required. If VT occurs after MI, give 
IV amiodarone infusion for 12–24h; if 24h after MI, also start oral anti-arrhythmic: 
sotalol (if good LV function) or amiodarone (if poor LV function).

  • Prevention  of  recurrent  VT:  surgical  isolation  of  the  arrhythmogenic  area  or  an 

implantable cardioverter deﬁ brillator (ICD) may help.

Ventricular ﬁ brillation: (ECG p129, ﬁ g 3.29) Use non-synchronized DC shock (there is 
no R wave to trigger deﬁ brillation, p770): see p894, ﬁ g A3.
If SVT with aberrant conduction: Manage as SVT with eg adenosine (see p806).
Ventricular extrasystoles (ectopics): These are the commonest post-MI arrhyth-
mia but they are also seen in healthy people (often >10/h). Patients with frequent 
ectopics post-MI have a worse prognosis, but there is no evidence that antidysrhyth-
mic drugs improve outcome, indeed they may increase mortality.
Torsade de pointes: A form of VT, with a constantly varying axis, often in the setting 
of long QT syndromes (ECG p129, ﬁ g 3.31). Causes (p711): congenital or from drugs (eg 
some antidysrhythmics, tricyclics, antimalarials, antipsychotics). Torsade in the set-
ting of congenital long-QT syndromes can be treated with high doses of -blockers.
In acquired long-QT syndromes (p711), stop all predisposing drugs, correct hypo-
kalaemia, and give magnesium sulfate (2g IV over 10min). Alternatives include: over-
drive pacing (pace at a faster rate, then slow reduce) or isoprenaline IVI to increase 
heart rate.

_OHCM_10e.indb   804

_OHCM_10e.indb   804

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of broad complex tachycardia

805

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Use arrest protocol

No

Pulse?

Yes

Give O2 if SaO2<90%, get IV access & 12-lead ECG

Adverse signs?
  • Shock (BP <90mmHg, pulse >100)
  • Chest pain/ischaemia on ECG
  • Heart failure
  • Syncope

No

Yes

Correct electrolyte problems:
(esp. low K+, Mg2+, Ca2+)

Assess rhythm

If regular:
If VT or uncertain rhythm, give amiodarone 
300mg IV over ≥20min. Then 900mg over 
24h, all via central line
If known history of SVT and BBB treat as 
for narrow complex tachycardia with eg 
adenosine (p806)
If irregular:
Seek expert help; diagnosis is usually one of:
  • AF (p130) with bundle branch block
  • Pre-excited AF: consider amiodarone
  • Polymorphic VT, eg torsade de pointes; 

see above; give Mg2+ 2g IVI

If no success or becomes unstable: 
Sedation

Synchronized DC shock: 150–200J 
150–360J x 2 (biphasic*)

Get expert help

Sedation

Up to 3 synchronized DC 
shocks: 120–150J for the ﬁ rst, 
then 150–360J subsequently*

Check and correct K+, Mg2+, Ca2+

Amiodarone 300mg IV over 
≥20min; consider repeat shock; 
then 900mg/24h IVI via central line

Further cardioversion if needed

For refractory cases seek 

expert help and consider:
  • Procainamide
  • Overdrive pacing

*Check your deﬁ brillator: energies given are for a typical biphasic deﬁ brillator (preferred); if a monophasic 
shock used, higher energies will be required.

Fig 19.9  Management of broad complex tachycardia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   805

_OHCM_10e.indb   805

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

806

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Narrow complex tachycardia
ECG shows rate of >100bpm and QRS complex duration of <120ms (<3 small squares on 
ECGs done at the standard UK rate of 25mm/s).
Diff  erential diagnosis (See p126.)
  • Sinus tachycardia: Normal P wave followed by normal QRS—not an arrhythmia! Do 
not attempt to cardiovert; if necessary (ie not a physiological response to fever/
hypovolaemia) rate control with -blockers.

  • Atrial tachyarrhythmias: Rhythm arises in atria, AV node is a bystander.

  • Atrial ﬁ brillation (AF): absent P wave, irregular QRS complexes.
  • Atrial ﬂ utter: atrial rate ~260–340bpm. Sawtooth baseline, due to a re-entrant 
circuit usually in the right atrium. Ventricular rate often 150bpm (2:1 block).

  • Atrial tachycardia: abnormally shaped P waves, may outnumber QRS.
  • Multifocal atrial tachycardia: ≥3 P-wave morphologies, irregular QRS complexes.
  • Junctional tachycardia: AV node is part of the pathway. P wave either buried in QRS 

complex or occurring after QRS complex.

  • AV nodal re-entry tachycardia.
  • AV re-entry tachycardia, includes an accessory pathway, eg WPW (p133).

Management Be guided by patient status,6 see ﬁ g 19.10.6
If the patient is compromised, use DC cardioversion.
  • Otherwise, identify the underlying rhythm and treat accordingly. The most impor-
tant thing is to decide whether the rhythm is regular or not (irregular is likely AF).
  • Vagal  manoeuvres  (carotid  sinus  massage,  Valsalva  manoeuvre)  transiently  in-

crease AV block, and may unmask an underlying atrial rhythm.

  • If unsuccessful, give adenosine, which causes transient AV block. It has a short half-
life (10–15s) and works by: 1 transiently slowing ventricles to show the underlying 
atrial rhythm; 2 cardioverting a junctional tachycardia to sinus rhythm.

Adenosine: Consult BNF if on dipyridamole or has had a heart transplant. Give 6mg 
IV bolus into a large vein, followed by 0.9% saline ﬂ ush, while recording a rhythm 
strip. If unsuccessful, after 2min give 12mg, then one further 12mg bolus. Warn about 
SE:  transient  chest  tightness,  dyspnoea,  headache,  ﬂ ushing.  Relative  CI:  Asthma, 
2nd/3rd-degree AV block or sinoatrial disease (unless pacemaker). Interactions: Po-
tentiated by dipyridamole; antagonized by theophylline.
Speciﬁ cs Sinus tachycardia: Identify and treat underlying cause.
Supraventricular  tachycardia: If adenosine fails, use verapamil  2.5–5mg  IV over 
2min. NB: NOT if on a -blocker. If no response, a further 5mg IV over 3min (if age 
<60yrs). Alternatives: atenolol 2.5mg IV repeated at 5min intervals until 10mg given; 
or amiodarone. If unsuccessful, use DC cardioversion.
Atrial ﬁ brillation/ﬂ utter: Manage with rate control; seek help if resistant (p130).
Atrial tachycardia: Rare; may be due to digoxin toxicity: withdraw digoxin, consider 
digoxin-speciﬁ c antibody fragments. Maintain K+ at 4–5mmol/L.
Multifocal atrial tachycardia: Most commonly occurs in COPD. Correct hypoxia and 
hypercapnia. Consider verapamil if rate remains >110bpm.
Junctional tachycardia: Where anterograde conduction through the AV node oc-
curs, vagal manoeuvres are worth trying. Adenosine will usually cardiovert a junc-
tional rhythm to sinus rhythm. If it fails or recurs, -blockers (or verapamil—not 
with -blockers, digoxin, or class I agents such as quinidine). If this does not control 
symptoms, consider radiofrequency ablation.
Seek specialist advice if resistant junction tachycardia, or accessory pathway.
Wolff  -Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome (ECG p133, ﬁ g 3.37.) Caused by congenital 
accessory conduction pathway between atria and ventricles. Resting ECG shows short 
PR interval and widened QRS complex due to slurred upstroke or ‘delta wave’. Two 
types: WPW type A (+ve  wave in V1), WPW type B (–ve  wave in V1). Present with SVT 
which may be due to an AVRT (p126), pre-excited AF, or pre-excited atrial ﬂ utter. Risk of 
degeneration to VF and sudden death. : Flecainide, propafenone, sotalol, or amiodar-
one. Refer to cardiologist for electrophysiology and ablation of the accessory pathway.

_OHCM_10e.indb   806

_OHCM_10e.indb   806

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of narrow complex tachycardia
(supraventricular tachycardia)

807

Give O2 if SaO2 <90%, get IV access & 12-lead ECG

Adverse signs?

  • Shock
  • Chest pain/ischaemia on ECG
  • Heart failure
  • Syncope

No

Yes

Is the rhythm regular?

Get expert help

Yes

No

Probable AF
See BOX

Sedation

Start continuous ECG trace. Perform vagal 
manoeuvres (caution if possible digoxin 
toxicity, acute ischaemia or carotid bruit)

Up to 3 synchronized DC shocks: 
70–120J for the ﬁ rst (120–150J for 
AF), then 120–360J subsequently*

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

If vagal manoeuvres fail, give adenosine 
6mg bolus IV, then 12mg, and further 12mg 
if necessary (verapamil 2.5–5mg over 2min 
is an alternative if adenosine contraindi-
cated or does not succeed)

Check and correct K+, Mg2+, Ca2+ 

Amiodarone 300mg IV over 
≥20min; consider repeat shock; 
then 900mg/24h IVI via central line

Sinus rhythm achieved?

Yes

No

Probable paroxys-
mal re-entrant SVT
Assess ECG for eg WPW
If recurrent consider 
referral for electro-
physiology/prophylaxis

Possible atrial ﬂ utter
Seek expert help
Control rate with, eg 
-blocker

*Check your deﬁ brillator: energies given are for a typical biphasic deﬁ brillator (preferred); if a monophasic 
shock used, higher energies will be required.

Fig 19.10  Management of narrow complex tachycardia (supraventricular tachycardia). 

  Irregular narrow complex tachycardia
  • Treat as AF—by far the most likely diagnosis.
  • Control rate with:

  • -blocker: eg metoprolol 1–10mg IV, give small increments to slow rate
  • rate-limiting Ca2+-channel blocker eg verapamil 5–10mg IV
  • digoxin is an alternative in heart failure (load with eg 500mcg PO then 500mcg 

PO after 8h and further 250mcg PO after 8h)

  • amiodarine (may also control rhythm—see last bullet point in this box).

  • Consider anticoagulation with warfarin or NOAC to  risk of stroke.
  • If onset deﬁ nitely <48h, or if eff ectively anticoagulated for >3wk, consider car-
dioversion with synchronized DC cardioversion under sedation (see p770). Chemi-
cal cardioversion may be achieved with ﬂ ecanide 300mg PO (only if deﬁ nitely no 
structural heart damage) or amiodarone, 300mg IVI over 20–60min, then 900mg 
over 24h.

_OHCM_10e.indb   807

_OHCM_10e.indb   807

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

808808

Bradycardia 

s
s
e
e
i
i
c
c
n
n
e
e
g
g
r
r
e
e
m
m
E
E

Bradycardia is deﬁ ned as a heart rate <60bpm. This may be normal and asympto-
matic  in  very  ﬁ t,  young  individuals  whose  high  stroke  volumes  will  maintain  ad-
equate cardiac output at low heart rates.
Symptoms Often asymptomatic. Fatigue, nausea, dizziness. The presence of synco-
pe, chest pain, or breathlessness is concerning and suggests the presence of adverse 
signs; sudden cardiac death can occur.
Rhythm The immediate management tends to relate more to cause and adverse 
signs than to the underlying rhythm, which may be •sinus bradycardia •heart block 
(see p98) •AF with a slow ventricular response •atrial ﬂ utter with a high-degree 
block •junctional bradycardia.
Causes
  • Physiological: Heart rates as low as 40bpm at rest and 30bpm in sleep can be ac-

cepted in asymptomatic trained athletes.

  • Cardiac:

  • Degenerative changes causing ﬁ brosis of conduction pathways (risk in elderly 
patients; may have previous ECGs showing bundle branch block or 1st- or 2nd-
degree heart block).

  • Post-MI—particularly after an inferior MI (the right coronary artery supplies the 

sinoatrial node and atrioventricular node in most people).

  • Sick sinus syndrome (p125).
  • Iatrogenic—ablation, surgery.
  • Aortic valve disease, eg infective endocarditis (p150;  do daily ECGs looking for 

heart block).

  • Myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, amyloid, sarcoid, SLE.

  • Non-cardiac origin:

  • Vasovagal—very common (p460).
  • Endocrine—hypothyroidism, adrenal insuffi  ciency.
  • Metabolic—hyperkalaemia, hypoxia.
  • Other—hypothermia, ICP (Cushing’s triad: bradycardia, hypertension, and ir-

regular breathing:  urgent senior input needed).

  • Drug-induced:

  • -blockers, amiodarone, verapamil, diltiazem, digoxin.

Management Follow a logical approach,6 see ﬁ g 19.11. 6
Think ahead. If you may need an anaesthetist to sedate the patient for transcuta-
neous pacing, or a cardiologist for transvenous pacing, call them now.
  • Perform a 12-lead ECG, check electrolytes (including K+, Ca2+, Mg2+), do digoxin levels.
  • Connect patient to cardiac monitor/telemetry.
  • Address the cause: correct metabolic defects; if the patient has adverse signs or is 
deteriorating, give antidotes to medicines likely to have caused the bradycardia (eg 
glucagon if -blocker overdose).

  • If the patient has adverse signs or risk of asystole, give atropine (not to be given if 

patient has a transplanted heart).

  • If atropine is insuffi  cient and adverse signs persist, transcutaneous pacing should 
be considered (p777). If this cannot be initiated immediately (eg waiting for an 
anaesthetist), consider other medications such as isoprenaline infusion.

  • Remember electrical ‘capture’ with transcutaneous pacing does not guarantee me-

chanical ‘capture’. Once pacing is established, check the patient’s pulse.

It is possible to have two patients sat next to each other with identical bradycardic 
ECG tracings, one of whom is peri-arrest, the other is sat comfortably and cannot 
understand your concern. The clinical state is more important than the numbers 
on the screen. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   808

_OHCM_10e.indb   808

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of bradycardia 

809
809

Give O2 if hypoxic; manual BP; ECG; IV access

Identify reversible causes (eg electrolyte abnormalities)

Adverse signs?

  • Shock
  • Syncope
  • Heart failure
  • Myocardial ischaemia

No

s
s
e
e
i
i
c
c
n
n
e
e
g
g
r
r
e
e
m
m
E
E

Risk of asystole?

  • Recent asystole
  • Mobitz II AV block (p98)
  • Complete heart block with 

broad QRS

  • Ventricular pause >3s

No

Continue observation

Yes

Give atropine 500mcg IV

Satisfactory 
response?

No

Yes

Yes

Interim measures:

  • Repeat atropine 500mcg IV every 

3–5mins (max 3mg)

  • Transcutaneous pacing—p777
  • Isoprenaline 5mcg/min IVI
  • Adrenaline 2–10mcg/min IVI
  • Alternatives: aminophylline, dopamine, 
glucagon (if bradycardia caused by 
-blocker or calcium channel blocker)

Seek expert help and arrange 
transvenous pacing

Fig 19.11  Management of bradycardia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   809

_OHCM_10e.indb   809

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

810

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Acute severe asthma
The severity of an attack is easily underestimated.
An atmosphere of calm helps.
Presentation Acute breathlessness and wheeze.
History (See p48.) Ask about usual and recent treatment; previous acute episodes and 
their severity and best peak expiratory ﬂ ow rate (PEF). Have they been admitted to ICU?
Diff  erential diagnosis Acute infective exacerbation of COPD, pulmonary oedema, 
upper respiratory tract obstruction, pulmonary embolus, anaphylaxis.
Investigations PEF—but may be too ill; ABG if saturations <92% or life-threatening fea-
tures; CXR (if suspicion of pneumothorax, infection or life-threatening attack); FBC; U&E.
Assessing the severity of an acute asthma attack
Severe attack:
  • Unable to complete sentences in one breath.
  • Respiratory rate ≥ 25/min.
  • Pulse rate ≥110 beats/min.
  • PEF 33–50% of predicted or best.
Life-threatening attack:
  • PEF <33% of predicted or best.
  • Silent chest, cyanosis, feeble respiratory eff ort.
  • Arrhythmia or hypotension.
  • Exhaustion, confusion, or coma.
  • Arterial blood gases:

  • Normal/high PaCO2 >4.6kPa.
  • PaO2 <8kPa, or SaO2 <92%.

Management Rapid treatment and reassessment is key,7 see ﬁ g 19.12.
  • Salbutamol 5mg nebulized with oxygen and give prednisolone 30mg PO.
  • If PEF remains <75%, repeat salbutamol; add ipratropium.
  • Monitor oxygen saturation, heart rate, and respiratory rate.
  • Admit  all  with  severe  features  not  responding  to  initial  treatment  or  with  life-

threatening features.

NB: the routine use of antibiotics is not recommended in exacerbations of asthma.
Discharge Patients with PEF >75% within 1h of initial treatment can be discharged if 
no other reason to admit. Otherwise, before discharge patients must have:
  • been stable on discharge medication for 24h
  • had inhaler technique checked
  • peak ﬂ ow rate >75% predicted or best with diurnal variability <25%
  • steroid (inhaled and oral) and bronchodilator therapy
  • their own PEF meter and have written management plan
  • GP appointment within 2d
  • respiratory clinic appointment within 4wks.
Drugs used in acute asthma
Salbutamol (2-agonist). SE: tachycardia, arrhythmias, tremor, K+.
Hydrocortisone and prednisolone (steroid; reduces inﬂ ammation).
Aminophylline is used much less frequently and is not routinely recommended in 
current BTS guidelines, but may be initiated by respiratory team or ICU. It inhibits 
phosphodiesterase; [cAMP]. SE: pulse, arrhythmias, nausea, seizures. The amount 
of  IVI  aminophylline  may  need  altering  according  to  the  individual  patient:  al-
ways check the BNF. Monitor ECG. Aim for plasma concentration of 10–20mcg/mL 
(55–110μmol/L). Serious tox icity (BP arrhythmias, cardiac arrest) can occur at con-
centrations ≥25mcg/mL. Measure plasma K+: theophyllines may cause K+. Don’t load 
patients already on oral preparations. Stick with one brand (bioavailability varies).

_OHCM_10e.indb   810

_OHCM_10e.indb   810

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of acute asthma 

811

Assess severity of attack:
PEF, ability to speak, RR, pulse rate, O2 sats
Warn ICU if severe or life-threatening attack

Immediate treatment:
Supplemental O2 to maintain sats 94–98%
Salbutamol 5mg (or terbutaline 10mg) nebulized with O2
If severe/life-threatening add in ipratropium 0.5mg/6h to nebulizers
Hydrocortisone 100mg IV or prednisolone 40–50mg PO

Reassess every 15min:

  • If PEF <75% repeat salbutamol nebulizers every 15–30min, or 
10mg/h continuously. Add ipratropium if not already given

  • Monitor ECG; watch for arrhythmias
  • Consider single dose of magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) 1 . 2–2g 
IV over 20min in those with severe/life-threatening features 
without good initial response to therapy

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

If not improving:
Refer  to  ICU  for  consideration  of 
ventilatory  support  and  intensiﬁ -
cation of medical therapy, eg ami-
nophylline, IV salbutamol if any of 
the following signs are present:
  • Deteriorating PEF
  • Persistent/worsening hypoxia
  • Hypercapnia
  • ABG showing low pH or high H+
  • Exhaustion, feeble respiration
  • Drowsiness, confusion, altered 

conscious level
  • Respiratory arrest

Fig 19.12  Management of acute asthma.

If improving within 15–30min:
  • Continue nebulized salbutamol 
every 4–6h (+ ipratropium if 
started in previous step)
  • Prednisolone 40–50mg PO OD 

for 5–7 days

  • Monitor peak ﬂ ow and O2 
sats, aim 94–98% with sup-
plemental if needed

  • If PEF >75% 1h after initial 

treatment, consider discharge 
with outpatient follow-up

_OHCM_10e.indb   811

_OHCM_10e.indb   811

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

812

Acute exacerbations of COPD

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

A common medical emergency especially in winter. May be triggered by viral or 
bacterial infections.
Presentation  Increasing  cough,  breathlessness,  or  wheeze.  Decreased  exercise 
capacity.
History (See p48.) Ask about usual/recent treatments (especially home oxygen), 
smoking  status,  and  exercise  capacity  (may  inﬂ uence  a  decision  to  ventilate  the 
patient).
Diff  erential  diagnosis  Asthma,  pulmonary  oedema,  upper  respiratory  tract  ob-
struction, pulmonary embolus, anaphylaxis.
Investigations
  • ABG (p771).
  • CXR to exclude pneumothorax and infection.
  • FBC; U&E; CRP. Theophylline level if patient on therapy at home.
  • ECG.
  • Send sputum for culture if purulent.
  • Blood cultures if pyrexial.
Management Ensure oxygenation then treat the reversible,8 see ﬁ g 19.13.
  • Look for a cause, eg infection, pneumothorax.
  • Prior to discharge, liaise with GP regarding steroid reduction, domiciliary oxygen 

(p184), smoking cessation, and pneumococcal and ﬂ u vaccinations (p166).

Treatment of stable COPD and more advanced disease: See pp184–5.
Consider the ceiling of care: What is in the best interests of the patient? Invasive 
ventilation for exacerbations of COPD may not be appropriate: it can be diffi  cult to 
wean patients off  ventilatory support, and brings with it the risk of ventilator-asso-
ciated pneumonias and pneumothoraces from ruptured bullae. If possible, speak to 
the patient early, before deterioration, try to ascertain their wishes. Patients who 
have previously been ventilated may not wish to repeat the experience. Consider 
comorbidities, FEV1, functional status, whether the patient requires home oxygen, 
and whether the patient has previously been admitted to ICU (and if so, whether they 
were easily weaned from invasive ventilation). Involve the patient, the family, your 
seniors, and ICU early in making a decision.

Oxygen therapy
  • The greatest danger is hypoxia, which probably accounts for more deaths than 

hypercapnia. Don’t leave patients severely hypoxic.

  • However, in some patients, who rely on their hypoxic drive to breathe, too much 
oxygen may lead to a reduced respiratory rate and hypercapnia, with a consequent 
fall in conscious level. Always prescribe O2 as if it were a drug.

  • Care is always required with O2, especially if there is evidence of CO2 retention. 

Start with 24–28% O2 in such patients.

 Whenever you initiate or change oxygen therapy, do consider an ABG within 1h.
  • Monitor the patient carefully. Aim to raise the PaO2 above 8.0kPa with a rise in 

PaCO2 <1.5kPa.

  • In patients without evidence of retention at baseline use 28–40% O2, but still 

monitor and repeat ABG.

_OHCM_10e.indb   812

_OHCM_10e.indb   812

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of acute COPD

813

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Nebulized bronchodilators:
Salbutamol 5mg/4h and ipratropium 500mcg/6h
Investigate: CXR, ABG

Controlled oxygen therapy if SaO2 <88% or PaO2 <7 kPa:
Start at 24–28%, aim sats 88–92%
Adjust according to ABG, aim Pa O2 >8.0kPa with a rise in Pa CO2 <1.5kPa

Steroids:
IV hydrocortisone 200mg and oral prednisolone
30mg OD (continue for 7–14d)

Antibiotics:
Use if evidence of infection, eg amoxicillin 500mg/8h PO,
alternatively clarithromycin or doxycycline (p387)

Physiotherapy to aid sputum expectoration

If no response to nebulizers and steroids:
Consider IV aminophylline*

If no response:
1      Consider non-invasive positive pressure ventilation† (NIPPV) if 
respiratory rate >30 or pH <7.35, or Pa CO2 rising despite best 
medical treatment. OR:

2      Consider a respiratory stimulant drug, eg doxapram 1.5–4mg/
min IV in patients who are not suitable for mechanical ventila-
tion. SE: agitation, confusion, tachycardia, nausea. It is a 
short-term measure, used only if NIV is not available

Consider intubation and ventilation if pH <7.26 and Pa CO2 is rising 
despite non-invasive ventilation only where appropriate (see 
‘Consider the ceiling of care’ in text)

*Load with 250mg over 20min, then infuse at a rate of ~500mcg/kg/h (300mcg/kg/h if elderly), where kg is 
ideal body weight. Do not give a loading dose to patients on maintenance methylxanthines (theophyllines/
aminophylline; see p811). Check plasma levels if given for >24h. ECG monitoring is required.

†This may alone serve as a rescue therapy, be an intermittent step before ventilation, or be considered as a 
‘ceiling of therapy’ for those deemed not suitable for mechanical ventilation.

Fig 19.13  Management of acute COPD.

_OHCM_10e.indb   813

_OHCM_10e.indb   813

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

814

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Pneumothorax 
Causes
  • Spontaneous: (Especially in young thin men) due to rupture of a subpleural bulla.
  • Chronic lung disease: Asthma; COPD; cystic ﬁ brosis; lung ﬁ brosis; sarcoidosis.
  • Infection: TB; pneumonia; lung abscess.
  • Traumatic: Including iatrogenic (CVP line insertion, pleural aspiration or biopsy, 

percutaneous liver biopsy, positive pressure ventilation).

  • Carcinoma.
  • Connective tissue disorders: Marfan’s syndrome, Ehlers–Danlos syndrome.
Clinical features
Symptoms: Can be asymptomatic (especially in ﬁ t young people with small pneu-
mothoraces) or sudden onset of dyspnoea and/or pleuritic chest pain. Patients with 
asthma or COPD may present with a sudden deterioration. Mechanically ventilated 
patients can suddenly develop hypoxia or an increase in ventilation pressures.
Signs: Reduced expansion, hyper-resonance to percussion, and diminished breath 
sounds on the aff ected side. With a tension pneumothorax, the trachea will be devi-
ated away from the aff ected side and the patient will be very unwell.
Tests A CXR should not be performed if a tension pneumothorax is suspected, as 
it will delay immediate necessary treatment. Otherwise, request an expiratory ﬁ lm, 
and look for an area devoid of lung markings, peripheral to the edge of the collapsed 
lung (see p725). Ensure the suspected pneumothorax is not a large emphysematous 
bulla. Check ABG in dyspnoeic/hypoxic patients and those with chronic lung disease.
Management See ﬁ g 19.14. Depends on whether it is a primary pneumothorax 
or secondary (=underlying lung disease or smoker >50yrs old), size, and symptoms.9
  • Size is measured from the visible lung margin to chest wall at level of the hilum.
  • Pneumothorax due to trauma or mechanical ventilation requires a chest drain.
  • Aspiration of a pneumothorax, see p767.
  • Insertion and management of a chest drain, see p766. Use a small tube (10–14F) 
unless blood/pus is also present. Tubes may be removed 24h after the lung has re-
expanded and air leak has stopped (ie the tube stops bubbling). This is done during 
expiration or a Valsalva manoeuvre.

Surgical advice: Arrange if: bilateral pneumothoraces; lung fails to expand within 
48h of intercostal drain insertion; persistent air leak; two or more previous pneumo-
thoraces on the same side; or history of pneumothorax on the opposite side.

Tension pneumothorax 
 This is a medical emergency. (See ﬁ g 16.43, p749.)
Essence  Air  drawn  into  the  pleural  space  with  each  inspiration  has  no  route  of 
escape  during  expiration.  The  mediastinum  is  pushed  over  into  the  contralateral 
hemithorax, kinking and compressing the great veins. Unless the air is rapidly re-
moved, cardiorespiratory arrest will occur.
Signs Respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotension, distended neck veins, trachea 
deviated away from side of pneumothorax. Increased percussion note, reduced air 
entry/breath sounds on the aff ected side.
Treatment
To remove the air, insert a large-bore (14–16G) needle with a syringe, partially ﬁ lled 
with 0.9% saline, into the 2nd intercostal interspace in the midclavicular line on the 
side of the suspected pneumothorax. Remove plunger to allow the trapped air to 
bubble through the syringe (with saline as a water seal) until a chest tube can be 
placed. Alternatively, insert a large-bore Venﬂ on in the same location.
 Do this before requesting a CXR.
 Then insert a chest drain. See p766.

_OHCM_10e.indb   814

_OHCM_10e.indb   814

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Acute management of pneumothorax

815

Primary pneumothorax:

SOB and/or rim of
air >2cm on CXR? 

Yes

Aspiration.
Successful?

No

Chest drain

Secondary pneumothorax:

SOB or rim of air 
>2cm on CXR?

Yes

Chest drain

No

No

Consider discharge and 
outpatient review in 2–4wks

No

Yes

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Size 1–2cm?

Yes

Aspiration. 
Successful?

No

Yes

Admit for 24h 
observation and O2

Fig 19.14  Acute management of pneumothorax. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   815

_OHCM_10e.indb   815

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

816

Pneumonia

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

An infection of the lung parenchyma. Incidence of community-acquired pneumonia 
is 5–11 per 1000 adults. Of these, 1–3 per 1000 will require hospitalization, and mortal-
ity in those hospitalized is up to 14%.
Common organisms
  • Streptococcus pneumoniae is the commonest cause (60–75%).
  • Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae.
  • Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
  • Staphylococcus aureus found more commonly in ICU patients.
  • Legionella species and Chlamydia psittaci.
  • Gram-negative bacilli, often hospital-acquired or immunocompromised, eg Pseudo-

monas, especially in those with COPD.

  • Viruses including inﬂ uenza account for up to 15%.
Symptoms  Fever,  rigors,  malaise,  anorexia,  dyspnoea,  cough,  purulent  sputum 
(classically ‘rusty’ with pneumococcus), haemoptysis, and pleuritic chest pain.
Signs  Fever,  cyanosis,  herpes  labialis  (pneumococcus),  confusion,  tachypnoea, 
tachy cardia, hypotension, signs of consolidation (diminished expansion, dull percus-
sion note,  tactile vocal fremitus/vocal resonance, bronchial breathing), pleural rub.
Management Ensure oxygenation then identify and treat reversible pathology,10 
see ﬁ g 19.15.
Investigations: Assess severity—this will guide both investigation and treatment.
  • CXR (X-ray images, ﬁ g 16.4 on p725).
  • Oxygen saturation and ABG if SaO2 <92% or severe pneumonia.
  • FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP.
  • Blood cultures (if CURB-65 ≥2).
  • Sputum cultures (if CURB-65 ≥3 or if CURB-65 =2 and not had antibiotics yet).
  • Urine pneumococcal antigen (if CURB-65 ≥2); Legionella antigen (if CURB-65 ≥3 or if 

clinical suspicion).

  • Consider need for viral throat swabs and mycoplasma PCR/serology.
  • Pleural ﬂ uid may be aspirated for culture (if CURB-65 ≥2).
  • Consider bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage if the patient is immunocom-

promised or on ICU.

Severity: Calculate the core adverse features ‘CURB-65’ score: •Confusion (abbrevi-
ated mental test ≤8). •Urea >7mmol/L. •Respiratory rate ≥30/min. •BP <90/60mmHg. 
•Age ≥65. Score: 0–1: home treatment if possible; ≥2: hospital therapy; ≥3: indicates 
severe pneumonia and should consider ICU referral.
Other features increasing the risk of death are: coexisting disease; bilateral/multi-
lobar involvement; PaO2 <8kPa or SaO2 <92%.
Treatment: See antibiotic guidance (table 4.2 on p167). Most patients who require IV 
antibiotics can safely be switched to PO therapy by day 3.
Complications (Of infection or treatment.) Pleural eff usion, empyema, lung abscess, 
respiratory failure, septicaemia, pericarditis, myocarditis, cholestatic jaundice, acute 
kidney injury.

_OHCM_10e.indb   816

_OHCM_10e.indb   816

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of pneumonia

817

Assess using ABC:
Treat hypoxia (sats <88%) with oxygen, 
start at 24–28% if history COPD/hypercapnia

Treat hypotension/shock from infection: see p790
Assess for dehydration (common if acutely unwell 
and fever), consider IV ﬂ uid support

Investigations:
See p816

Antibiotics:
See p167

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Analgesia for pleuritic chest pain, eg paracetamol 1g/6h or NSAID

No improvement?
If  hypoxic  despite  oxygen,  consider  CPAP  to  recruit  lung  paren-
chyma  and  improve  oxygenation.  But  if  patient  is  hypercapnic, 
they will require non-invasive or invasive (ie intubation) ventilation
Discuss with ICU early if patient has rising PaCO2 or remains 
hypoxic despite best medical therapy

Fig 19.15  Management of pneumonia.

_OHCM_10e.indb   817

_OHCM_10e.indb   817

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

818

Pulmonary embolism (PE)

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Always suspect pulmonary embolism (PE) in sudden collapse 1–2wks after surgery.
Mechanism  Venous  thrombi,  usually  from  DVT,  pass  into  the  pulmonary  circula-
tion and block blood ﬂ ow to lungs. The source is often occult.
Risk factors
  • Malignancy; myeloproliferative disorder; antiphospholipid syndrome.
  • Surgery—especially pelvic and lower limb (much lower if prophylaxis used).
  • Immobility; active inﬂ ammation (eg infection, IBD).
  • Pregnancy; combined OCP; HRT.
  • Previous thromboembolism and inherited thrombophilia, see p374.
Signs and symptoms
  • Acute dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain, haemoptysis, and syncope.
  • Hypotension,  tachycardia,  gallop  rhythm,  JVP,  loud  P2,  right  ventricular  heave, 

pleural rub, tachypnoea, cyanosis, AF.

With thromboprophylaxis, PE following surgery is far less common, but PE may oc-
cur after any period of immobility, or with no predisposing factors. Breathlessness 
may  be  the  only  sign.  Multiple  small  emboli  may  present  less  dramatically  with 
pleuritic pain, haemoptysis, and gradually increasing breathlessness. Look for a 
source of emboli—especially DVT (is a leg swollen?).
Investigations Risk stratify based upon clinical features (use 2-level Wells’ score 
for PE—p191). A Ωve D-dimer in a low-probability patient eff ective excludes PE.11
  • U&E, FBC, baseline clotting.
  • ECG: commonly normal or sinus tachycardia; right ventricular strain pattern V1–V3 
(p98), right axis deviation, RBBB, AF, may be deep S waves in I, Q waves in III, in-
verted T waves in III (‘SI QIII TIII’).

  • CXR: often  normal;  decreased  vascular  markings,  small  pleural  eff usion.  Wedge-

shaped area of infarction. Atelectasis.

  • ABG: hyperventilation + poor gas exchange: PaO2, PaCO2, pH.
  • Serum D-dimer: low speciﬁ city ( if thrombosis, inﬂ ammation, post-op, infection, 

malignancy)  check only in patients with low pre-test probability (p191).

  • CT  pulmonary  angiography  (CTPA)  is  sensitive  and  speciﬁ c  and  is  the  test  of 
choice for high-risk patients or low-risk patients with a +ve D-dimer. If unavaila-
ble, a ventilation–perfusion (V/Q) scan can aid diagnosis but frequently produces 
equivocal results

Management See ﬁ g 19.16 for immediate management.11
If  good  story  and  signs,  make  the  diagnosis.  Start  treatment  (ﬁ g  19.16)  before 
deﬁ nitive investigations: most PE deaths occur within 1h.
  • Commence LMWH or fondaparinux.
  • If there is haemodynamic instability, consider thromolysis.
  • Long-term  anticoagulation:  either  DOAC  (p350—switch  directly  from  LMWH)  or 

warfarin (continue LMWH until INR >2).

  • Is there an underlying cause, eg thrombophilia (p374), SLE, or polycythaemia? Con-
sider malignancy (take a careful history and perform a full physical examination; 
check CXR, FBC, LFT, Ca2+; urinalysis; consider CT abdomen/pelvis and mammogram).
  • If  obvious  remedial  cause,  3  months  of  anticoagulation  (p351)  may  be  enough; 
otherwise,  continue  for  ≥3–6  months  (long  term  if  recurrent  emboli,  or 
underlying malignancy).

Prevention See p190.

_OHCM_10e.indb   818

_OHCM_10e.indb   818

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of large pulmonary embolism

819

Oxygen if hypoxic, 10–15L/min

Morphine 5–10mg IV with anti-emetic
if the patient is in pain or very distressed

IV access and start LMWH/fondaparinux

If BP give 500mL IV ﬂ uid bolus
Get ICU input

Haemodynamically unstable? 

No

Yes

If persistent BP consider vasopressors, 
eg dobutamine 2.5–10mcg/kg/min IV or 
noradrenaline; aim for systolic BP >90mmHg

Consider thrombolysis
(eg alteplase 10mg IV bolus 
then IVI 90mg/2h)

Initiate long-term anticoagulation

Fig 19.16  Management of large pulmonary embolism. 

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   819

_OHCM_10e.indb   819

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

820

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Causes
  • Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) 35–50%.
  • Gastroduodenal erosions 8–15%.
  • Oesophagitis 5–15%.
  • Mallory–Weiss tear 15%.
  • Varices 5–10%.
  • Other: upper GI malignancy, vascular malformations. Consider also facial trauma, 

nose bleed, or haemoptysis as causes of swallowed blood.

Signs and symptoms (See pp56–63.) Haematemesis, or melaena, dizziness (espe-
cially postural), fainting, abdominal pain, dysphagia? Hypotension (in young may be 
postural only), tachy cardia (not if on -blocker), JVP, urine output, cool and clammy, 
signs  of  chronic  liver  disease  (p276),  eg  telangiectasia,  purpura,  jaundice.  NB:  ask 
about previous GI problems, drug use, alcohol.
Management  Focus  on  circulation,12  see  ﬁ g  19.17.  Risk  stratify  based  upon,  eg 
Rockall score (see table 6.6, p257).
Is the patient shocked?
  • Peripherally cool/clammy; capillary reﬁ ll time >2s; urine output <0.5mL/kg/h.
  • GCS or encephalopathy (p275).
  • Tachycardic (pulse >100bpm).
  • Systolic BP <100mmHg; postural drop >20mmHg.
If shocked: See ﬁ g 19.17 for management.
If haemodynamically stable:
  • Insert two large-bore (14–16G) IV cannulae and take blood for FBC, U&E, LFT, clotting, 

and group & save.

  • Give  IV  ﬂ uids  (p821)  to  restore  intravascular  volume;  avoid  saline  if  cirrhotic/

varices; consider a CVP line to monitor and guide ﬂ uid replacement.

  • Organize a CXR, ECG, and check ABG.
  • Consider a urinary catheter and monitor hourly urine output.
  • Transfuse if signiﬁ cant Hb drop (<70g/L).
  • Correct clotting abnormalities (vitamin K (p274), FFP, platelets).
  • If suspicion of varices (eg known history of liver disease or alcohol excess) then 
give terlipressin IV  (1–2mg/6h for ≤3d) and initiate broad-spectrum IV antibiotics 
(eg piperacillin/tazobactam IV 4.5g/8h).

  • Monitor pulse, BP, and CVP (keep >5cmH20) at least hourly until stable.
  • Arrange an urgent endoscopy (p248).
  • If endoscopic control fails, surgery or emergency mesenteric angiography/embo-
lization may be needed. For uncontrolled oesophageal variceal bleeding, a Seng-
staken–Blakemore tube may compress the varices, but should only be placed by 
someone with experience.

Acute drug therapy: There is no role for routine administration of PPI pre-endoscopy 
(provided endoscopy can be arranged in a timely manner). In patients undergoing 
successful endoscopic haemostasis, give PPI (eg omeprazole 40mg/12h IV/PO). Treat if 
positive for H. pylori (p253).
Rebleeds Serious event: 40% of patients who rebleed will die. If ‘at risk’ maintain 
a high index of suspicion. If a rebleed occurs, check vital signs every 15min and call 
senior cover for repeat endoscopy and/or surgical intervention.
Signs of a rebleed:
  • Rising pulse rate.
  • Falling JVP ± decreasing hourly urine output.
  • Haematemesis or ‘fresh’ melaena (NB: it is normal to pass decreasing amounts of 
melaena for 24h post-haemostasis, as blood makes its way through the GI tract).

  • Fall in BP (a late and sinister ﬁ nding) and decreased conscious level.

_OHCM_10e.indb   820

_OHCM_10e.indb   820

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Immediate management if shocked

821

Protect airway and keep NBM
Insert two large-bore cannulae (14–16G)

Urgent bloods: FBC, U&E, LFT, glucose, clotting 
screen, crossmatch 4–6 units

Rapid IV crystalloid infusion up to 1L

If signs of grade III or IV shock (p790) give blood
Group speciﬁ c or O Rh–ve until crossmatch done

Otherwise continue IV ﬂ uids to 
maintain BP and transfuse if eg Hb <7

Correct clotting abnormalities
Vitamin K, FFP, platelet concentrate

If risk of varices (eg known liver disease or 
alcohol excess), give terlipressin IV 1–2mg/6h and 
broad-spectrum IV antibiotics

Consider referral to ICU or HDU, and consider CVP 
line to guide ﬂ uid replacement. Aim for >5cmH2O
CVP may mislead if there is ascites or CCF

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Catheterize and monitor urine output. Aim for >30mL/h

Monitor vital signs every 15min until stable, then hourly

Notify surgeons of all severe bleeds

Urgent endoscopy for diagnosis ± control of bleeding 
at the earliest possible point after adequate resuscitation

Fig 19.17  Immediate management of suspected upper GI bleed with shock.

_OHCM_10e.indb   821

_OHCM_10e.indb   821

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

822

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Meningitis
Primary care Prompt actions save lives. If suspect meningitis arrange urgent 
transfer to secondary care. If a non-blanching rash is present, give benzylpenicil-
lin 1.2g IM/IV before admitting.
Organisms Meningococcus or pneumococcus. Less commonly Haemoph ilus inﬂ u-
enzae; Listeria monocytogenes. HSV, VZV, enteroviruses. CMV, cryptococcus (p400), 
or TB (p393) if immunocompromised, eg HIV +ve, organ transplant, malignancy.
Diff  erential  Malaria,  encephalitis,  septicae-
mia, subarachnoid, dengue, tetanus.
Features
Early: Headache, fever, leg pains, cold hands 
and feet, abnormal skin colour.
Later:
  • Meningism:  neck  stiff ness,  photophobia, 
Kernig’s  sign  (pain  +  resistance  on  passive 
knee extension with hip fully ﬂ exed).

  •  GCS, coma.
  • Seizures (~20%) ± focal CNS signs (~20%) ± 

opisthotonus (p436, ﬁ g 9.46).

  • Petechial rash (non-blanching—ﬁ g 19.18; may 

only be 1 or 2 spots, or none).

Fig 19.18  Glass test for petechiae.
Courtesy of Meningitis Research Foundation.

  • Shock: prolonged capillary reﬁ ll time; DIC; BP.
Signs of disease causing meningitis: Zoster; cold sore/genital vesicles (HSV); HIV 
signs (lymph ad en opathy, dermatitis, candidiasis, uveitis); bleeding ± red eye (lepto-
spirosis); parotid swelling (mumps); sore throat ± jaundice ± nodes (glandular fever, 
p405); splenectomy scar ( immunodeﬁ cient).
Management See ﬁ g 19.19; investigations and treatment proceed in parallel.13
  • If  ICP, summon help immediately and inform ICU.
  • Initiate early antibiotics. Take blood cultures ﬁ rst. Then perform LP prior to an-
tibiotics only in patients where no evidence of shock, petechial rash or ICP and 
where able to obtain LP within 1h (table 19.4). Consult local policies and seek ad-
vice. Empirical options include ceftriaxone 2g/12h IV; add eg amoxicillin 2g/4h IV if 
>60yrs age or immunocompromised. If suspect viral encephalitis see p824.

  • If features of menigism give dexamethasone 10mg/6h IV
  • Other investigations, U&E, FBC (WBC ≈ immunocompromise: get help), LFT, glucose, 
coagulation. Throat swabs (1 for bacteria, 1 for virology). CXR. Consider HIV, TB tests.
  • Prophylaxis (discuss with public health/ID): •Household contacts in droplet range. 
•Those who have kissed the patient’s mouth. Give ciproﬂ oxacin (500mg PO, 1 dose; 
child 5–12yrs: 250mg; child <5yrs: 30mg/kg to max 125mg).

Tuberculous (p393) Viral (‘aseptic’)
Often ﬁ brin web
Mononuclear*

  Lumbar puncture in meningitis
Table 19.4  CSF analysis in meningitis
CSF in meningitis Bacterial
Appearance
Often turbid
Predominant cell  Polymorphs*
Cell count/mm3
Glucose
Protein (g/L)
Bacteria
*Predominant cell type may also be lymphocytes in TB, listerial, and cryptococcal meningitis.
Perform LP (p768) without waiting for CT (not if GCS ≤12 or focal neurology). Wait for 
clotting screen only if suspect coagulopathy. Record opening pressure—7–18cm CSF 
normal but  in meningitis. Send CSF for MC&S, protein, lactate, glucose, virology/PCR.
Normal values: ≤5 lymphocytes/mm3 with no neutrophils is normal. Protein: 0.15–
0.45g/L. CSF glucose: 2.8–4.2mmol/L.

Eg 90–1000 or more 10–1000
<½ plasma
>1.5
In smear & culture Often none in smear None seen or cultured

Usually clear
Mononuclear
50–1000
>½ plasma
<1

<½ plasma
1–5

_OHCM_10e.indb   822

_OHCM_10e.indb   822

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of suspected bacterial meningitis and 
meningococcal sepsis

823

ABCs: IVI + ﬂ uid resus. Check and correct blood glucose

Meningitic: (eg neck stiff ness; 

photophobia) without shock

Septicaemic: eg shock (prolonged capillary 
reﬁ ll time; cold hands + feet; BP), evolving rash

Take blood cultures

Get ICU help:

Signs of ICP/shift of brain (papil-
loedema, uncontrolled seizures, focal 
neurology, GCS ≤12)

Yes

No

  • Take blood cultures
  • IV antibiotics (see text)
  • Airway support /pre-emptive intubation
  • Fluid resuscitation/ionotropes/vaso-

pressors (aim for: MAP >70mmHg; urine 
output >30mL/h)
  • Delay LP until stable

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Get ICU help:

  • IV antibiotics (see text)
  • Dexamethasone 10mg IV
  • Airway support
  • Fluid resuscitation
  • Delay LP until stable
  • Nurse at 30°

Get senior help:

  • Perform LP ≤1h
  • IV antibiotics (see text) 
pre-LP, if LP delayed >1h
  • Dexamethasone 10mg IV

Careful monitoring
Subsequent  therapy: Discuss  antibiotic  therapy with microbiology and adjust 
based  on  organism  and  local  sensitivities.  Maintain  normovolaemia  with  IVI  if 
needed. Isolate for 1st 24h. Inform Public Health, p381.

Fig 19.19  Management of suspected bacterial meningitis and meningococcal sepsis in immuno-
competent adults.

_OHCM_10e.indb   823

_OHCM_10e.indb   823

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

824

Encephalitis

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Suspect  encephalitis  whenever  odd  behaviour,  consciousness,  focal  neurology 
or seizure is preceded by an infectious prodrome (T°, rash, lymphadenopathy, cold 
sores, conjunctivitis, meningeal signs). It is often wise to treat (see below) before the 
exact cause is known—usually viral, and often never identiﬁ ed. Without the infec-
tious prodrome consider encephalopathy: hypoglycaemia, hepatic encephalopathy, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, drugs, hypoxic brain injury, uraemia, SLE, Wernicke’s (give vit 
B1 if in doubt p714).
Signs and symptoms
  • Bizarre encephalopathic behaviour or confusion.
  • GCS or coma.
  • Fever.
  • Headache.
  • Focal neurological signs.
  • Seizures.
  • History of travel or animal bite.
Causes
  • Viral: HSV-1 & 2, arboviruses, CMV, EBV, VZV (varicella-zoster virus), HIV (seroconver-
sion), measles, mumps, rabies, Japanese B encephalitis, West Nile virus, tick-borne 
encephalitis.

  • Non-viral: Any bacterial meningitis, TB, malaria, listeria, Lyme disease, legionella, 

leptospirosis, aspergillosis, cryptococcus, schistosomiasis, typhus.

Investigations
  • Bloods: Blood cultures; serum for viral PCR (also throat swab and MSU); toxoplasma 

IgM titre; malaria ﬁ lm.

  • Contrast-enhanced CT: Focal bilateral temporal lobe involvement is suggestive of 
HSV encephalitis. Meningeal enhancement suggests meningoencephalitis. Do be-
fore LP. MRI is alternative if allergic to contrast.

  • LP: Typically moderately CSF protein and lymphocytes, and glucose (p822). Send 

CSF for viral PCR including HSV.

  • EEG: Urgent  EEG showing diff use abnormalities may help conﬁ rm a diagnosis of 

encephalitis, but does not indicate a cause.

Management
Mortality in untreated viral encephalitis is ~70%. Aim to start aciclovir within 
30min of the patient arriving (10mg/kg/8h IV over 1h) for 14d as empirical treat-
ment for HSV (21d if immunosuppressed). Speciﬁ c therapies also exist for CMV and 
toxoplasmosis (p425).

  • Supportive therapy, in high-dependency unit or ICU environment if necessary.
  • Symptomatic treatment: eg phenytoin for seizures (p826).

Cerebral abscess

Suspect this in any patient with ICP, especially if there is fever or WCC. It may follow 
ear, sinus, dental, or periodontal infection; skull fracture; congenital heart disease; 
endocarditis; bronchiectasis. It may also occur in the absence of systemic signs of 
inﬂ ammation.
Signs Seizures, fever, localizing signs, or signs of ICP. Coma. Signs of sepsis else-
where (eg teeth, ears, lungs, endocarditis).
Investigations CT/MRI p746 (eg ‘ring-enhancing’ lesion); WCC, ESR; biopsy.
Treatment  Urgent  neurosurgical  referral;  treat  ICP  (p830).  If  frontal  sinuses  or 
teeth  are  the  source,  the  likely  organism  will  be  Strep.  milleri  (microaerophilic), 
or oropharyngeal anaerobes. In ear abscesses, B. fragilis or other anaerobes are 
most common. Bacterial abscesses are often peripheral; toxoplasma lesions (p425) 
are deeper (eg basal ganglia). NB: ask yourself: is the patient immunocompromised? 
Discuss with infectious diseases/microbiology.

_OHCM_10e.indb   824

_OHCM_10e.indb   824

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

825

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   825

_OHCM_10e.indb   825

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

826

Status epilepticus
This means seizures lasting for >30min, or repeated seizures without intervening 
consciousness. Mortality and the risk of permanent brain damage increase with the 
length of attack. Aim to terminate seizures lasting more than a few minutes as soon 
as possible (<20min).

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Status usually occurs in patients with known epilepsy. If it is the 1st presentation, 
the chance of a structural brain lesion is high (>50%). Diagnosis of tonic–clonic status 
is usually clear. Non-convulsive status (eg absence status or continuous partial sei-
zures with preservation of consciousness) may be more diffi  cult: look for subtle eye 
or lid movement. For other signs, see pp484, 490–3. An EEG can be very helpful. Could 
the patient be pregnant (any pelvic mass)? If so, eclampsia (OHCS p48) is the likely 
diagnosis, check the urine and BP: call a senior obstetrician—immediate delivery may 
be needed.
Investigations
  • Bedside glucose, the following tests can be done once  has started: lab glucose, 

ABG, U&E, Ca2+, FBC, ECG.

  • Consider anticonvulsant levels, toxicology screen, LP, culture blood and urine, EEG, 

CT, carbon monoxide level.

  • Pulse oximetry, cardiac monitor.
Management See ﬁ g 19.20. Basic life support—and these agents:14
1      Lorazepam: 0.1mg/kg (usually 4mg) as a slow bolus into a large vein. If no re-
sponse after 10–20min give a second dose. Beware respiratory arrest during the 
last part of the injection. Have full resuscitation facilities to hand for all IV benzodi-
azepine use. The rectal route is an alternative for diazepam if IV access is diffi  cult.
Buccal midazolam is an easier to use oral alternative where no IV access (eg in 
a community setting); dose for those 10yrs old and older 10mg; if 1–5yrs 5mg, if 
5–10yrs 7 . 5mg; squirt half the volume between the lower gum and the cheek on 
each side. While waiting for this to work, prepare other drugs. If ﬁ ts continue …
2      Phenytoin infusion: 15–18mg/kg IVI (roughly 1g if 60kg, and 1 . 5g if 80kg; max 2g), 
at a maximum rate of 50mg/min (don’t put diazepam in same line: they don’t mix). 
Beware BP and do not use if bradycardic or heart block. Requires  BP and  ECG 
monitoring. 100mg/6–8h is a maintenance dose (check levels). If ﬁ ts continue …
3      Seek ICU help: Paralysis and anaesthesia with eg propofol is required. Close moni-
toring,  especially  respiratory  function,  is  vital.  Consider  whether  this  could  be 
pseudoseizures (p490), particularly if there are odd features (pelvic thrusts; resist-
ing attempts to open lids and your attempts to do passive movements; arms and 
legs ﬂ ailing around).

4      Dexamethasone: 10mg IV if vasculitis/cerebral oedema (tumour) possible.
As soon as seizures are controlled, start oral drugs (p492). Ask what the cause was, 
eg hypoglycaemia, pregnancy, alcohol, drugs, CNS lesion or infection, hypertensive 
encephalopathy, inadequate anticonvulsant dose/compliance (p490).

_OHCM_10e.indb   826

_OHCM_10e.indb   826

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management of convulsive status epilepticus

827

Open and secure the airway (adjuncts as necessary)
Remove false teeth if poorly ﬁ tting

Oxygen, 100% + suction (as required)

IV access and take blood:
U&E, LFT, FBC, glucose, Ca2+
Toxicology screen if indicated
Anticonvulsant levels

IV bolus—to stop seizures: eg lorazepam 4mg
Give 2nd dose of lorazepam if no response after 10–20min

Thiamine 250mg IV over 30min if alcoholism or 
malnourishment suspected
Glucose 50mL 50% IV, unless glucose known to be normal
Treat acidosis if severe (contact ICU)

Correct hypotension with ﬂ uids

IV infusion: If seizures continue, start phenytoin, 
15–18mg/kg IVI, at a rate of 50mg/min. Monitor ECG and BP. 
100mg/6–8h is a maintenance dose (check levels)

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

General anaesthesia: Continuing seizures after 60–90mins of above 
therapies require expert help with paralysis (eg propofol infusion) and 
ventilation with continuous EEG monitoring in ICU. NB: never spend longer 
than 20min on someone with status epilepticus without having help at the 
bedside from an anaesthetist

Fig 19.20  Management of status epilepticus.

_OHCM_10e.indb   827

_OHCM_10e.indb   827

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

828

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Head injury
If the pupils are unequal, diagnose rising intracranial pressure (ICP), eg from ex-
tradural haemorrhage, and summon urgent neurosurgical help (p482). Retinal vein 
pulsation at fundoscopy helps exclude ICP.
Initial management See ﬁ g 19.21. Write full notes. Record times.
Stabilization of airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC) remains the 1st priority. If 
GCS ≤8 then seek urgent anaesthetic and ICU help to protect airway.15
  • Involve neurosurgeons early, especially if GCS, or if ICP suspected.
  • Examine the CNS. Chart pulse, BP, T°, respirations + pupils every 15min.
  • Assess anterograde amnesia (loss from the time of injury, ie post-traumatic) and 
retrograde amnesia (for events prior to injury)—extent of retrograde loss corre-
lates with severity of injury, and never occurs without anterograde amnesia.
  • Nurse semi-prone if no spinal injury; meticulous care to airway and bladder.
Perform a CT head <1h if :
  • GCS <13 on initial assessment, or GCS <15 at 2h following injury.
  • Focal neurological deﬁ cit.
  • Suspected open or depressed skull fracture, or signs of basal skull fracture: perio-
bital  ecchymoses  (‘panda’  eyes/racoon  sign),  postauricular  ecchymosis  (Battle’s 
sign), CSF leak through nose/ears, haemotympanum.

  • Post-traumatic seizure.
  • Vomiting more than once.
Perform a CT head <8h if : Any loss of consciousness or amnesia AND any of: •age ≥65 
•coagulopathy •high-impact injury, eg struck by or ejected from motor vehicle; fall 
>1m or >5 stairs •retrograde amnesia of >30min.
Suspected cervical spine injuries: Perform a CT cervical spine <1h if:
  • GCS <13 on initial assessment.
  • The patient has been intubated.
  • Deﬁ nitive diagnosis of cervical spine injury is needed urgently (eg before surgery).
  • The patient is having other body areas scanned, eg multi-region trauma.
  • Clinical suspicion of cervical spine injury AND ANY OF: •age 65 years or older •high-
impact injury •focal neurological deﬁ cit •paraesthesia in the upper or lower limbs.
If above-listed criteria are  NOT met  AND IF ANY OF the following low-risk features 
are  present,  then  assess  neck  movement: •simple  rear-end  motor  vehicle  collision 
•comfortable in a sitting position •ambulatory since injury •no midline cervical spine 
tenderness •delayed onset of neck pain. If patient unable actively to rotate neck 45° 
to left and right or if a low-risk feature not present, then obtain plain X-rays of cer-
vical spine <1h. If X-rays technically inadequate, suspicious, or deﬁ nitely abnormal, 
proceed to CT.
Admit if: •new, clinically signiﬁ cant abnormalities on CT •GCS<15 after CT, regardless 
of result or continuing worrying signs (eg vomiting) •when CT indications met but 
CT unavailable •other concerns (eg drugs or alcohol, other injuries, CSF leak, shock, 
suspected non-accidental injury, meningism).
Do not attribute GCS to alcohol until a signiﬁ cant head injury has been excluded. 
Alcohol is an unlikely cause of coma if plasma alcohol <44mmol/L. If unavailable, es-
timate blood alcohol level from the osmolar gap (p668). If blood alcohol ≈ 40mmol/L, 
osmolar gap ≈ 40mmol/L.
Discuss  with  neurosurgical  unit  all with signiﬁ cant abnormalities on  CT or with 
eg persistent GCS ≤8 or deteriorating GCS (especially motor component), persistent 
confusion,  progressive  focal  neurology,  seizure  without  full  recovery,  penetrating 
injuries, or CSF leak. If transfer is required, ensure skilled medical escort and consider 
need for intubation prior to transfer.
Complications Early: Extradural/subdural haemorrhage, seizures. Late: Subdural 
(p482), seizures, diabetes insipidus, parkinsonism, dementia.
Indicators  of  a  bad  prognosis  Old  age,  decerebrate  rigidity,  extensor  spasms, 
prolonged coma, BP, PaO2 (on blood gases),  T° >39°C. 60% of those with loss of 
consciousness of >1 month will survive 3–25yrs, but may need daily nursing care.

_OHCM_10e.indb   828

_OHCM_10e.indb   828

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Immediate management plan for head injury

829

ABC

Oxygen if saturations <92% or hypoxic on ABG
Intubate and hyperventilate if necessary
Immobilize neck until injury to cervical spine excluded

Stop blood loss and support circulation
Treat for shock if required (p790)

Treat seizures with lorazepam ± phenytoin (p826)

Assess level of consciousness (GCS):
If GCS ≤8 ICU involvement to manage airway
Assess for anterograde and retrograde amnesia

Rapid examination survey

Investigations:
U&ES, glucose, FBC, blood alcohol,
toxicology screen, ABGS, and clotting

Neurological examination

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Brief history:
When? Where? How? Had a ﬁ t? Lucid interval? Alcohol?

Evaluate lacerations of face or scalp:
Palpate deep wounds with sterile glove to check for
step deformity. Note obvious skull/facial fractures

Check for CSF leak, from nose (rhinorrhoea) or ear (otorrhoea)
Any blood behind the ear drum?
If either is present, suspect basilar skull fracture: do CT
Give tetanus toxoid, and refer at once to neurosurgeons

Palpate the neck posteriorly for tenderness and deformity:
If detected, or if the patient has other indicators for neck imaging, im-
mobilize the neck and get cervical spine X-ray or CT neck (see text)

Radiology:
As indicated: CT of head/neck (see text)
Consider need for trauma series (eg CT chest/abdo/pelvis)

Fig 19.21  Immediate management plan for head injury. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   829

_OHCM_10e.indb   829

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

830

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Raised intracranial pressure (ICP)
The volume inside the cranium is ﬁ xed, so any increase in the contents can lead to 
raised ICP. This can be mass eff ect, oedema, or obstruction to ﬂ uid outﬂ ow. Normal 
ICP in adults is <15mmHg.
Causes
  • Primary or metastatic tumours.
  • Head injury.
  • Haemorrhage (subdural, extradural, subarachnoid, intracerebral, intraventricular).
  • Infection: meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess.
  • Hydrocephalus.
  • Cerebral oedema.
  • Status epilepticus.
Signs and symptoms
  • Headache (worse on coughing, leaning forwards), vomiting.
  • Altered GCS: drowsiness, listlessness, irritability, coma.
  • History of trauma.
  • HR and BP (Cushing’s response); Cheyne–Stokes respiration.
  • Pupil changes (constriction at ﬁ rst, later dilation—do not mask these signs by using 

agents such as tropicamide to dilate the pupil to aid fundoscopy).

  • Visual acuity; peripheral visual ﬁ eld loss.
  • Papilloedema is an unreliable sign, but venous pulsation at the disc may be absent 

(absent in ~50% of normal people, but loss of it is a useful sign).

Investigations
  • U&E, FBC, LFT, glucose, serum osmolality, clotting, blood culture.
  • Consider toxicology screen.
  • CXR—any source of infection that might indicate abscess?
  • CT head.
  • Then consider LP if safe. Measure the opening pressure!
Management See ﬁ g 19.22. The goal is to ICP and avert secondary injury. Urgent 
neurosurgery is required for the deﬁ nitive treatment of ICP from focal causes (eg 
haematomas). This is achieved via a craniotomy or burr hole. Also, an ICP monitor (or 
bolt) may be placed to monitor pressure. Holding measures are listed in ﬁ g 19.22.
Herniation syndromes
Uncal herniation is caused by a lateral supratentorial mass, which pushes the ipsi-
lateral inferomedial temporal lobe (uncus) through the temporal incisura and against 
the midbrain. The IIIrd nerve, travelling in this space, gets compressed, causing a 
dilated ipsilateral pupil, then ophthalmoplegia (a ﬁ xed pupil localizes a lesion poorly 
but is ‘ipsilateralizing’). This may be followed (quickly) by contralateral hemiparesis 
(pressure on the cerebral peduncle) and coma from pressure on the ascending re-
ticular activating system (ARAS) in the midbrain.
Cerebellar tonsil herniation is caused by pressure in the posterior fossa forcing 
the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum. Ataxia, VIth nerve palsies, and 
upgoing plantar reﬂ exes occur ﬁ rst, then loss of consciousness, irregular breathing, 
and apnoea. This syndrome may proceed very rapidly given the small size of, and 
poor compliance in, the posterior fossa.
Subfalcian (cingulate) herniation is caused by a frontal mass. The cingulate gyrus 
(medial frontal lobe) is forced under the rigid falx cerebri. It may be silent unless the 
anterior cerebral artery is compressed and causes a stroke—eg contralateral leg 
weakness ± abulia (lack of decision-making).

_OHCM_10e.indb   830

_OHCM_10e.indb   830

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Immediate management plan for raised intracranial pressure

831

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

ABC

Correct hypotension, maintain MAP >90mmHg and treat seizures

Brief examination; history if available:
Any clues, eg meningococcal rash, previous carcinoma

Elevate the head of the bed to 30–40°

If intubated, hyperventilate to PaCO2 (aim 3.5–4kPa):
This causes cerebral vasoconstriction and reduces ICP almost 
immediately. Maintain PaO2 >12kPa

Osmotic agents (eg mannitol) can be useful but
may lead to rebound ICP after prolonged use (~12–24h):
Give 20% solution 0.25–0.5g/kg IV over 10–20min (eg 5mL/kg). 
Eff ect is seen after ~20min and lasts for 2–6h. Follow serum 
osmolality—aim for about 300mosmol/kg but don’t exceed 310

Corticosteroids are not effective in reducing ICP
except for oedema surrounding tumours:
Eg dexamethasone 10mg IV and follow with 4mg/6h IV/PO

Consider other measures,
eg sedation, anti-epileptics, therapeutic hypothermia

Restrict ﬂ uid to <1 . 5L/d

Monitor the patient closely; consider monitoring ICP

Aim to make a diagnosis

Treat cause or exacerbating factors,
eg hyperglycaemia, hyponatraemia

Deﬁ nitive treatment if possible

Fig 19.22  Immediate management plan for raised intracranial pressure.

_OHCM_10e.indb   831

_OHCM_10e.indb   831

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

832

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Mechanism Normally the body metabolizes carbohydrates, leading to effi  cient en-
ergy production. Ketoacidosis is an alternative metabolic pathway used in starva-
tion states; it is far less effi  cient, and produces acetone as a byproduct (hence the 
fruity breath of patients in ketosis). In acute diabetic ketoacidosis, there is excessive 
glucose, but because of a lack of insulin, this cannot be taken up into cells to be 
metabolized, so pushing the body into a starvation-like state where ketoacidosis 
is  the  only  mechanism  of  energy  production.  The  combination  of  severe  acidosis 
and hyperglycaemia can be deadly, so early recognition and treatment is important.
Typical picture Gradual drowsiness, vomiting, and dehydration in type 1 diabetic 
(very rarely type 2). Do glucose in all those with unexplained vomiting, abdo pain, 
polyuria, polydipsia, lethargy, anorexia, ketotic breath, dehydration, coma, or deep 
breathing (sighing ‘Kussmaul’ hyperventilation). Triggers: Infection, eg UTI; surgery; 
MI; pancreatitis; chemotherapy; antipsychotics; wrong insulin dose/non-compliance.
Diagnosis

Ω < 15.0mmol/L).

1      Acidaemia (venous blood pH <7.3 or HCO3
2      Hyperglycaemia (blood glucose >11.0mmol/L) or known DM.
3      Ketonaemia (≥3.0mmol/L) or signiﬁ cant ketonuria (more than 2+ on dipstick).
Tests: ECG, CXR. Urine: Dipstick and MSU. Blood: Capillary and lab glucose, ketones, pH 
Ω, osmolality, FBC, blood culture.
(use venous blood; ABG only if GCS or hypoxia), U&E, HCO3
Severe DKA If one or more of the following features is present on admission, con-
sider transfer to HDU/ICU for monitoring and central venous access. Get senior help!
  • Blood ketones >6mmol/L.
  • O2 sats <92% on air (assuming no res-
  • Venous bicarbonate <5mmol/L.
  • Venous/arterial pH <7.0.
  • K <3.5mmol/L on admission.
  • GCS <12.
Management Replace volume then correct metabolic defects,16 see ﬁ g 19.23.
Pitfalls in diabetic ketoacidosis
  • Plasma glucose is usually high, but not always, especially if insulin continued.
  • High WCC may be seen in the absence of infection.
  • Infection. Often there is no fever. Do MSU, blood cultures, and CXR. Start broad-

  • Systolic BP <90mmHg.
  • Pulse >100 or <60 bpm.
  • Anion gap above 16 (p670).

piratory disease).

spectrum antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav, p386) early if infection is suspected.

  • Creatinine. Some assays for creatinine cross-react with ketone bodies, so plasma 

creatinine may not reﬂ ect true renal function.

  • Hyponatraemia is common, due to osmolar compensation for the hyperglycaemia. 
 or  [Na+] indicates severe water loss. As treatment commences Na+ rises as 
water enters cells. Na+ is also low due to an artefact; corrected plasma [Na+] = Na+ 
+ 2.4[(glucose Ω5.5)/5.5].

  • Ketonuria does not equate with ketoacidosis. Anyone may have up to ++ketonuria 
after an overnight fast. Not all ketones are due to diabetes—consider alcohol if 
glucose normal. Always check venous blood ketones.

  • Recurrent ketoacidosis. Blood glucose may return to normal long before ketones 
are removed from the blood, and premature termination of insulin infusion may 
lead to lack of clearance and return to DKA. This may be avoided by maintaining 
a constant rate of insulin infusion (with co-infusion of glucose 10% to maintain 
plasma glucose at 6–10mmol/L) until blood ketones <0 . 6mmol/L and pH >7.3.

  • Acidosis but without gross elevation of glucose may occur, but consider overdose 

(eg aspirin) and lactic acidosis (in elderly diabetics).

  • Serum amylase is often raised (up to ≈10) and non-speciﬁ c abdominal pain is com-

mon, even in the absence of pancreatitis.

Complications Cerebral oedema (get help if sudden CNS decline), aspiration pneu-
monia, hypokalaemia, hypo magnesaemia, hypophosphataemia, thromboembolism.
Prevention Talk to the patient: evaluate compliance and educate about triggers.

_OHCM_10e.indb   832

_OHCM_10e.indb   832

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management plan for diabetic ketoacidosis

833

ABC approach, 2 large-bore cannulae:
Start ﬂ uid: 1L 0.9% saline over 1h (if systolic BP <90mmHg then give 500mL 
bolus over 15mins and reassess—if systolic BP still <90mmHg then seek senior 
review and give further 500mL bolus; if BP remains <90mmHg then involve ICU)

Tests: Venous blood gas for pH, bicarbonate; bedside and lab 
glucose and ketones; U&ES, FBC, CRP; CXR, ECG

Insulin: Add 50 units human soluble insulin to 50mL 0.9% saline. Infuse con-
tinuously at 0.1 unit/kg/h. Continue patient’s regular long-acting insulin at usual 
doses and times; consider initiating long-acting insulin in newly diagnosed T1DM.
Aim for a fall in blood ketones of 0.5mmol/L/h, or a rise in venous bicarbo-
nate of 3mmol/L/h with a fall in glucose of 3mmol/L/h. If not achieving this, 
increase insulin infusion by 1 unit/h until target rates achieved

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Check capillary blood glucose and ketones hourly

Check VBG (pH, HCO3

Ω, K+) at 2h, 4h, 8h, 12h, and 24h (or more frequent)

Continue ﬂ uids and assess need for K+ (see below)

Consider catheter if not passed urine by 1h, aim for urine output 
0.5mL/kg/h. Consider NG tube if vomiting or drowsy
Start all patients on LMWH

Avoid hypoglycaemia! When glucose <14mmol/L start 10% glucose 
at 125mL/h to run alongside saline and prevent hypoglycaemia

Continue ﬁ xed-rate insulin until ketones <0 . 6mmol/L, venous pH 
>7.3, and venous bicarb >15mmol/L. Do not rely on urinary ketones to 
indicate resolution—they stay positive after DKA resolved
Find and treat infection/cause for DKA

Fig 19.23  Management plan for diabetic ketoacidosis.

  Fluid replacement
  • 0.9% saline is the replacement ﬂ uid of choice.
  • Typical ﬂ uid deﬁ cit is 100mL/kg, so for an average 70kg man = 7 litres.
  • Give eg 1L in 1h (faster if systolic BP <90mmHg) then: 1L over 2h, 1L over 2h, 1L 
over 4h, 1L over 4 h, 1L over 8h. This regimen may not be appropriate for all: reas-
sess frequently, especially if young, elderly, pregnant, or comorbidities.

  • Bicarbonate may increase risk of cerebral oedema and is not recommended.

  Potassium replacement
  • Typical deﬁ cit = 3–5mmol/kg, plasma K+ falls with treatment as K+ enters cells.
  • Don’t  add  K+  to  the  1st  bag.  Thereafter  add  K+ according  to  most  recent  VBG 

result (table 19.5).

Table 19.5  Potassium replacement in DKA
Serum K+ (mmol/L)

Amount of KCl to add per litre of IV ﬂ uid

>5.5
3.5–5.5
<3.5

Nil
40mmol
Seek help from HDU/ICU for higher doses

_OHCM_10e.indb   833

_OHCM_10e.indb   833

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

834

Other diabetic emergencies

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Hypoglycaemia Usually rapid onset; may be accompanied by odd behaviour (eg ag-
gression), sweating, pulse, seizures. Management: If conscious, orientated, and able 
to swallow, give 15–20g of quick-acting carbohydrate snack (eg 200mL orange juice) 
and recheck blood glucose after 10–15mins (repeat snack up to 3 times). If conscious but 
uncooperative, squirt glucose gel between teeth and gums. In unconscious patients, or 
those not responding to these measures, start glucose IVI (eg 10% at 200mL/h if con-
scious; 10% at 200mL/15mins if unconscious), or give glucagon 1mg IV/IM (will not work 
in malnourished patients). Expect prompt recovery. Once blood glucose >4.0mmol/L 
and patient has recovered, give long-acting carbohydrate (eg slice of toast).
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) Seen in unwell patients with type 2 DM.17 
The history is longer (eg 1wk), with marked dehydration and glucose >30mmol/L. There is 
no switch to ketone metabolism, so ketonaemia stays <3mmol/L and pH >7.3. Osmolality 
is typically >320mosmol/kg: Occlusive events are a danger (focal CNS signs, chorea, DIC, 
leg  ischaemia/rhabdomyolysis)—give  LMWH  prophylaxis  to  all  unless  contraindication 
(p350). Rehydrate slowly with 0.9% saline IVI over 48h, typical deﬁ cits are 110–220mL/
kg, ie 8–15L for a 70kg adult. Replace K+ when urine starts to ﬂ ow (see DKA BOX, p833). 
Only use insulin if blood glucose not falling by 5mmol/L/h with rehydration or if keto-
naemia—start slowly 0.05u/kg/h. Keep blood glucose at least 10–15mmol/L for ﬁ rst 24 
hours to avoid cerebral oedema. Look for the cause, eg MI, drugs, sepsis, or bowel infarct.
Lactic acidosis A rare but serious complication of DM with metformin use or septi-
caemia. Blood lactate: >5mmol/L. Seek expert help. Treat sepsis vigorously, maintain 
blood pressure and hence tissue perfusion. Stop metformin.

Thyroid emergencies

Myxoedema coma The ultimate hypothyroid state before death.
Signs and symptoms: Looks hypothyroid (p220, p221, ﬁ g 5.16); often >65yrs; hypother-
mia; hyporeﬂ exia; glucose; bradycardia; coma; seizures. May have had radioiodine, 
thyroidectomy, or pituitary surgery (signs of hypopituitarism, p232). Psychosis (myxo-
edema madness) may precede coma. Precipitants: infection, MI, stroke, or trauma.
Examination: Goitre; cyanosis; BP (cardiogenic); heart failure; signs of precipitants.
Treatment: Preferably on ICU.
  • Blood for: T3, T4, TSH, FBC, U&E (often Na+), cultures, cortisol, glucose.
  • ABG for PaO2. High-ﬂ ow O2 if cyanosed. Ventilation may be needed.
  • Correct any hypoglycaemia.
  • Give T3 (liothyronine) 5–20mcg/12h IV slowly. Be cautious: you may precipitate man-
ifestations of ischaemic heart disease. Alternative regimens involve levothyroxine.
  • Give hydrocortisone 100mg/8h IV—vital if pituitary hypothyroidism is suspected (ie 

no goitre, no previous radioiodine, and no previous thyroid surgery).

  • If infection suspected, give antibiotic, eg co-amoxiclav 1.2g/8h IV.
  • Caution with ﬂ uid, rehydrate as needed but watch for cardiac dysfunction; BP may 

not respond to ﬂ uid and inotropes may be needed.

  • Active warming (blankets, ﬂ uids) may be needed for hypothermia. Beware compli-

cations (hypoglycaemia, pancreatitis, arrhythmias). See p848.

Further : T3 5–20mcg/4–12h IV until sustained improvement (~2–3d) then levothyrox-
ine 50mcg/24h PO. Hydrocortisone + IV ﬂ uids as needed (hyponatraemia is dilutional).
Hyperthyroid crisis (thyrotoxic storm) Signs and symptoms: :≈4:1. Severe 
hyper thyroid ism (see p218): T°, agitation, confusion, coma, tachycardia, AF, D&V, goi-
tre, thyroid bruit, acute abdomen (exclude surgical causes), heart failure.
Precipitants: Recent thyroid surgery or radioiodine; infection; MI; trauma.
Diagnosis: Do not wait for test results if urgent treatment is needed. Do TSH, free T4, 
and free T3. Conﬁ rm with technetium uptake if possible.
Treatment: See ﬁ g 19.24. Seek endocrinology advice and aim to: 1 Counteract periph-
eral eff ects of thyroid hormones. 2 Inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis. 3 Treat systemic 
complications. If you are not making headway in 24h, thyroidectomy may be an option.

_OHCM_10e.indb   834

_OHCM_10e.indb   834

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Management plan for thyrotoxic storm

835

IV access, ﬂ uids if dehydrated. NG tube if vomiting

Take blood for: T3, T4, TSH, cultures (if infection suspected)

Sedate if necessary (eg chlorpromazine 50mg PO/IM). Monitor BP

If no contraindication, and cardiac output OK, give propranolol 60mg/4–
6h PO; max IV dose: 1mg over 10min; may need repeating every few hours. 
In asthma/poor cardiac output, propranolol has caused cardiac arrest in 
thyr oid storm, so ultra-short-acting -blockers have a role, eg IV esmolol. 
Consider diltiazem if -blockers contraindicated. Get help

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

High-dose digoxin may be needed to slow the heart, but 
ensure adequately -blocked, give with cardiac monitoring

Antithyroid drugs: carbimazole 15–25mg/6h PO (or via 
NGT); after 4h give Lugol’s solution (aqueous iodine oral 
solution) 0.3mL/8h PO well diluted in water for 7–10d to 
block thyroid

Hydrocortisone 100mg/6h IV or dexamethasone 2mg/6h PO 
to prevent peripheral conversion T4 to T3

Treat suspected infection, eg with co-amoxiclav 1.2g/8h IV

Adjust IV ﬂ uids as necessary; cool with tepid 
sponging ± paracetamol

Continuing treatment: After 5d reduce carbimazole to 15mg/8h PO.
After 10d stop propranolol and iodine. Adjust carbimazole (p218)

Fig 19.24  Management plan for thyrotoxic storm.

_OHCM_10e.indb   835

_OHCM_10e.indb   835

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

836

Addisonian crisis

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Signs and symptoms Patients may present in shock (HR; vasoconstriction; pos-
tural hypotension; oliguria; weak; confused; comatose)—often (but not always) in a 
patient with known Addison’s (eg when oral steroid has not been increased to cover 
stress such as pneumonia), or someone on long-term steroids who has forgotten 
their tablets. Remember bilateral adrenal haemorrhage (eg meningococcaemia) as 
a cause. An alternative presentation is with hypoglycaemia.
Precipitating factors Infection, trauma, surgery, missed medication.
Management If suspected, treat before biochemical results.
  • Bloods for cortisol and ACTH (this needs to go straight to laboratory, call ahead!), 
U&ES—can have K+ (check ECG and give calcium gluconate if needed, see p301) and 
Na+ (salt depletion, should resolve with rehydration and steroids).

  • Hydrocortisone 100mg IV stat.
  • IV ﬂ uid bolus eg 500mL 0.9% saline to support BP, repeated as necessary.
  • Monitor blood glucose: the danger is hypoglycaemia.
  • Blood, urine, sputum for culture, then antibiotics if concern about infection.
Continuing treatment
  • Glucose IV may be needed if hypoglycaemic.
  • Give IV ﬂ uids as guided by clinical state and to correct U&E imbalance.
  • Continue hydrocortisone, eg 100mg/8h IV or IM.
  • Change to oral steroids after 72h if patient’s condition good.
  • Fludrocortisone may well be needed if the cause is adrenal disease: ask an expert.
  • Search for (and vigorously treat) the underlying cause. Get endocrinological help.

Hypopituitary coma

Think of decompensated chronic hypophyseal failure whenever hypothermia, refrac-
tory hypotension ± septic signs without fever occur with short stat ure or loss of 
axillary/pubic hair ± gonadal atrophy. Waiting for lab conﬁ rmation may be fatal. It 
usually develops gradually in a person with known hypopituitarism. If rapid onset 
due to pituitary infarction (eg postpartum, Sheehan’s, p232), subarachnoid haemor-
rhage is often misdiagnosed as symptoms include headache and meningism.
Presentation  Headache;  ophthalmoplegia;  consciousness;  hypotension;  hypo-
thermia; hypoglycaemia; signs of hypopituitarism (p232).
Tests Cortisol; T4; TSH; ACTH; glucose. Pituitary fossa CT/MRI.
Treatment Hydrocortisone, eg 100mg IV/6h.
  • Only  after  hydrocortisone  begun:  liothyronine  (L-tri-iodothyronine  sodium),  eg 

10mcg/12h PO or by slow IV: 5–20mcg/12h (4-hourly may be needed).
  • Prompt surgery is needed if the cause is pituitary apoplexy (p234).

_OHCM_10e.indb   836

_OHCM_10e.indb   836

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Phaeochromocytoma emergencies

837

Patients with phaeochromocytoma may have had undiagnosed symptoms for some 
time, but stress, abdominal palpation, parturition, general anaesthetic, or contrast 
media used in imaging can cause acute hypertensive crises.
Signs and symptoms Pallor, pulsating headache, hypertension, feels ‘about to die’, 
pyrexial. ECG: signs of LVF, ST segment, VT, and cardiogenic shock.
Treatment Get help. Take to ICU.
Principle is combined - and -adrenoreceptor blockade, but  must be started ﬁ rst, 
as unopposed -blockade can worsen hypertension.
  • Start with short-acting, IV -blocker, eg phentolamine 2–5mg IV. Repeat to main-

tain safe BP.

  • When BP controlled, give long-acting -blocker, eg phenoxybenzamine 10mg/24h 
PO (increase by 10mg/d as needed, up to 30mg/12h PO); SE: postural hypotension; 
dizziness; tachycardia; nasal congestion; miosis; idiosyncratic marked BP drop after 
1st dose. The idea is to  the dose until BP is controlled and there is no signiﬁ cant 
postural hypotension. Alternative 1-selective blockers, eg doxazosin, are preferred 
in some centres, particularly if surgery is not an option, eg metastatic tumour.
  • A 1-blocker may also be given at this stage to control any tachycardia or myocar-

dial ischaemia/dysrhythmias (p114).

  • Surgery is usually done electively after 4–6wks to allow full -blockade and volume 
expansion. When admitted for surgery the phenoxybenzamine dose is increased 
until signiﬁ cant postural hypotension occurs.

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   837

_OHCM_10e.indb   837

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

838

Acute poisoning—general measures

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Diagnosis Mainly from the history. The patient may not tell the truth about what 
has been taken. If there are any tablets with the patient, use MIMS Colour Index, 
EMIMS images, BNF descriptions, or the computerized system ‘TICTAC’ (ask pharmacy) 
to identify tablets and plan speciﬁ c treatment.
TOXBASE  The  best  resource  for  managing  acute  poisoning:  www.toxbase.org—check 
with your Emergency Department about log-in details for your hospital.
Clues May become apparent from examination:
  • Fast or irregular pulse: Salbutamol, antimuscarinics, tricyclics, quinine, or phe-

nothiazine poisoning.

  • Respiratory depression: Opiate (p842) or benzodiazepine (p842) toxicity.
  • Hypothermia: Phenothiazines (p843), barbiturates.
  • Hyperthermia: Amphetamines, MAOIS, cocaine, or ecstasy (p843).
  • Coma: Benzodiazepines, alcohol, opiates, tricyclics, or barbiturates.
  • Seizures: Recreational drugs, hypoglycaemic agents, tricyclics, phenothia zines, or 

theophyllines.

  • Constricted pupils: Opiates (p842) or insecticides (organophosphates, p843).
  • Dilated pupils: Amphetamines, cocaine, quinine, or tricyclics.
  • Hyperglycaemia: Organophosphates, theophyllines, or MAOIS.
  • Hypoglycaemia: (p834) Insulin, oral hypoglycaemics, alcohol, or salicylates.
  • Renal impairment: Salicylate (p844), paracetamol (p844), or ethylene glycol.
  • Metabolic  acidosis: Alcohol, ethylene glycol, methanol, paracetamol, or carbon 

monoxide poisoning (p842).

  • Osmolality: Alcohols (ethyl or methyl); ethylene glycol. See p668.
Management See ﬁ g 19.25.
  • Take blood as appropriate (p840). Always check paracetamol and salicylate levels.
  • Empty stomach if appropriate (p840).
  • Consider speciﬁ c antidote (p842) or oral activated charcoal (p840).
  • If  you  are  not  familiar  with  the  poison  get  more  information. Toxbase  (www.
toxbase.org) should be your ﬁ rst thought. If no information here or in doubt how 
best to act, phone the Poisons Information Service: in the UK phone 0844 892 0111.
Continuing care Measure temperature, pulse, BP, and blood glucose regularly. Keep 
on cardiac monitor. If unconscious, nurse semi-prone, turn regularly. Catherize if the 
bladder is distended, or acute kidney injury (p298) is suspected, or forced diuresis 
undertaken. Consider ICU, eg if respiration.
Psychiatric assessment Be sympathetic despite the hour! Interview relatives and 
friends if possible. Aim to establish:
  • Intentions at time. Was this a suicide attempt, if so was the act planned? What 
precautions against being found? Did the patient seek help afterwards? Does the 
patient think the method was dangerous? Was there a ﬁ nal act (eg suicide note)?

  • Present intentions. Do they still feel suicidal? Do they wish it had worked?
  • What problems led to the act: do they still exist?
  • Is  there  a  psychiatric  disorder  (depression,  alcoholism,  personality  disorder, 

schizophrenia, dementia)?

  • What are the patient’s resources (friends, family, work, personality)?
The assessment of suicide risk: The following  chance of future suicide: original in-
tention was to die; present intention is to die; presence of psychiatric disorder; poor 
resources; previous suicide attempts; socially isolated; unemployed; male; >50yrs old. 
See OHCS p358. There is risk of death in the ﬁ rst year following initial presentation.
Referral to psychiatrist: This depends partly on local resources. Refer all with pres-
ence of psychiatric disorder or high suicide risk. Consider discussing all presenta-
tions with deliberate self-poisoning.
Mental Capacity Act or the Mental Health Act: (In England and Wales) may pro-
vide for the detention of the patient against his or her will: see OHCS p406.

_OHCM_10e.indb   838

_OHCM_10e.indb   838

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

  Emergency care in acute poisoning

839

ABC, clear airway

Consider ventilation (if the respiratory rate is <8/min, or PaO2
<8kPa, when breathing 60% O2, or the airway is at risk, eg GCS ≤ 8)

Treat shock (p790)

If unconscious, nurse semi-prone

  Further management

Assess the patient

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

History from patient, friends, or family is vital

Features from the examination may help (see p838)

Investigations:
  • Glucose, U&E, FBC, LFT, INR, ABG, ECG, paracetamol, and salicylate levels
  • Urine/serum toxicology, speciﬁ c assays as appropriate

Monitor:
  • T°, pulse, and respiratory rate, BP, O2 saturations, urine output ± ECG

  • Supportive measures: may need catheterization
  • Absorption: consider gastric lavage ± activated charcoal (see p840)

Treatment:

Speciﬁ c measures: See p840; for antidotes, see p842
Consider naloxone if conscious level and pin-point pupils
Consider Pabrinex® and glucose if drowsy/confused

Fig 19.25  Emergency care in acute poisoning.

_OHCM_10e.indb   839

_OHCM_10e.indb   839

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

840

Acute poisoning—speciﬁ c points

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Plasma toxicology For all unconscious patients, paracetamol and aspirin levels and 
blood glucose are required. The necessity of other assays depends on the drug taken 
and  the  index  of  suspicion.  Be  guided  by  the  Poisons  Information  Service.  More 
common assays include: digoxin; methanol; lithium; iron; theophylline. Toxicological 
screening of urine, especially for recreational drugs, may be of use in some cases 
(although not always, see BOX).
GI decontamination Recommended for many drugs. The treatment of choice is now 
activated charcoal rather than gastric lavage. If in doubt, consult Toxbase or Poisons 
Information Service.
Activated  charcoal  Reduces  the  absorption  of  many  drugs  from  the  gut  when 
given as a single dose of 50g with water, eg salicylates, paracetamol. It is given 
in repeated doses (50g/4h) to increase elimination of some drugs from the blood, 
eg  carbamazepine,  dapsone,  theophyllines,  quinine,  phenobarbital,  and  paraquat. 
Lower doses are used in children. Do not use with petroleum products, corrosives, 
alcohols, clofenotane, malathion, or metal salts (eg iron, lithium).
Gastric lavage Rarely used. Lavage after 30–60min may make matters worse. Do 
not empty stomach if petroleum products or corrosives such as acids, alkalis, bleach, 
descalers have been ingested (exception: paraquat), or if the patient is unconscious 
or unable to protect their airway (unless intubated). Never induce vomiting.
Gastric  emptying  and  lavage  NB:  we  do  not  recommend  gastric  lavage  is  at-
tempted unless speciﬁ cally suggested by Toxbase or Poisons Information Service. 
If comatose, or no gag reﬂ ex, ask for an anaesthetist to protect airway with cuff ed 
endotracheal tube. If conscious, get verbal consent.
  • Monitor O2 by pulse oximetry. See p162.
  • Have suction apparatus to hand and working.
  • Position the patient in left lateral position.
  • Raise the foot of the bed by 20cm.
  • Pass a lubricated tube (14mm external diameter) via the mouth, asking the patient 

to swallow.

  • Conﬁ rm position in stomach (see p759).
  • Siphon the gastric contents. Check pH with litmus paper.
  • Perform gastric lavage using 300–600mL tepid water at a time. Massage the left 

hypochondrium then siphon ﬂ uid.

  • Repeat until no tablets in siphoned ﬂ uid.
  • Leave activated charcoal (50g in 200mL water) in the stomach unless alcohol, iron, 

Li+, or ethylene glycol ingested.

  • When pulling out tube, occlude its end (prevents aspiration of ﬂ uid remaining in 

the tube).

Haemodialysis  This  may  be  needed  for  poisoning  from  ethylene  glycol,  lithium, 
methanol, phenobarbital, salicylates, and sodium valproate.
Help on the web Healthcare providers in the UK can register for free toxological 
advice at www.toxbase.org or call 0344 892 0111 for Poisons Information Service.

_OHCM_10e.indb   840

_OHCM_10e.indb   840

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Legal highs
Increasingly,  ‘designer’  drugs,  with  chemical  properties  similar  to  illegal  drugs 
(but yet suffi  ciently distinct to fall outside current legislation), are leading to acute 
poisoning  and  complications  requiring  admission.  These  drugs  pose  a  diffi  cult 
problem for the admitting physician, as the precise chemistry and mechanisms 
of action of both the active compound as well as any impurities are often unclear. 
Although many are legal, they can be as deadly as many well-known recreational 
drugs, leading to death or life-threatening complications such as rhabdomyolysis. 
Be aware that these drugs are out there, and ask speciﬁ cally about legal highs 
when taking a history, as there are often no screening tools for these drugs.

841

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   841

_OHCM_10e.indb   841

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

842

Some speciﬁ c poisons and their antidotes

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Benzodiazepines Flumazenil (for respiratory arrest) 200mcg over 15s; then 100mcg 
at 60s intervals if needed. Usual dose range: 300–600mcg IV over 3–6min (up to 1mg; 
2mg if on ICU). May provoke ﬁ ts. Use only after expert advice.
-blockers  Severe  bradycardia  or  hypotension.  Try  atropine  up  to  3mg  IV.  Give 
glucagon 2–10mg  IV bolus + 5% glucose if atropine fails then infusion of 50mcg/
kg/h. Also consider including phosphodiesterase inhibitor infusions (eg enoximone 
5–20mcg/kg/min). If unresponsive, consider pacing.
Cyanide This fast-killing poison has affi  nity for Fe3+, and inhibits the cytochrome 
system, aerobic  respiration  (therefore  patients  are  acidotic  with  raised  lactate). 
Depending on degree of poisoning presentation can be:
  • Mild: Dizziness, anxiety, tachycardia, nausea, drowsiness/confusion.
  • Moderate: Vomiting, reduced consciousness, convulsions, cyanosis.
  • Severe: Deep coma, ﬁ xed unreactive pupils, cardiorespiratory failure, arrhythmias, 

pulmonary oedema.

Treatment: 100% O2, GI deconta mination. If mild, supportive care is usually suf-
ﬁ cient. If moderate/severe then speciﬁ c treatment to bind cyanide is required. Give 
sodium  nitrite/sodium  thiosulfate,  or  dicobalt  edetate  300mg  IV  over  1min,  then 
50mL 50% glucose IV (repeat once if no response after a minute); or hydroxocobala-
min (Cyanokit∏) 5g over 15min repeated once if required. Get expert help. See p847.
Carbon monoxide Despite hypoxaemia skin is pink (or pale), not blue, as carboxyhae-
moglobin (COHb) displaces O2 from Hb binding sites. For the same reasons SpO2 
from a pulse oximeter may be normal. Check ABG in a co-oximeter (ie ensure it meas-
ures haemoglobin, SaO2, Meth-Hb and COHb) which will show low SaO2 and high 
COHb  (normal <5%). Symptoms:  Headache,  vomiting,  pulse,  tachypnoea,  and,  if 
COHb >50%, ﬁ ts, coma, and cardiac arrest.
Treatment: Remove the source. Give 100% O2 until COHb <10%. Metabolic acido-
sis usually responds to correction of hypoxia. If severe, anticipate cerebral oedema 
and give mannitol IVI (p831). Conﬁ rm diagnosis with an ABG quickly as levels may 
soon return to normal. Monitor ECG. If COHb >20%, patient has neurological or psy-
chological features, or cardiovascular impairment, fails to respond to treatment, or 
is pregnant, consider hyperbaric O2: discuss with the poisons service.
Digoxin Symptoms: Cognition, yellow-green visual halos, arrhythmias, nausea, and 
anorexia. If serious arrhythmias are present, correct hypokalaemia, and inactivate 
with digoxin-speciﬁ c antibody fragments (DigiFab®). If load or level is unknown, give 
20 vials (800mg)—adult or child >20kg.
Heavy metals Enlist expert help.
Iron Desferrioxamine 15mg/kg/h IVI; max 80mg/kg/d. NB: gastric lavage if iron inges-
tion in last hour; consider whole-bowel irrigation.
Oral  anticoagulants  See  p351.  If  major  bleed,  give  vitamin  K  5mg  slow  IV  and 
prothrombin complex concentrate 50U/kg IV (or if unavailable, fresh frozen plasma 
15mL/kg IVI). For abnormal INR with no (or minimal) bleeding, see BNF. If it is vital 
that  anticoagulation  continues,  enlist  expert  help.  Discuss  with  haematology.  NB: 
coagulation defects may be delayed for 2–3d following ingestion.
Opiates (Many analgesics contain opiates.) Give naloxone, eg 0.4–2mg  IV; repeat 
every 2min until breathing is adequate (it has a short t½, so it may need to be given 
often or IM; max ~10mg). Naloxone may precipitate features of opiate withdrawal—
diarrhoea and cramps, which will normally respond to diphenoxylate and atropine 
(eg co-phenotrope). Sedate as needed (see p15). High-dose opiate misusers may need 
methadone (eg 10–30mg/24h PO) to combat withdrawal. Refer for help (OHCS p374).

_OHCM_10e.indb   842

_OHCM_10e.indb   842

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

843

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Phenothiazine  poisoning  (Eg  chlorpromazine.)  No  speciﬁ c  antidote.  Dystonia 
(torticollis,  retrocollis,  glossopharyngeal  dystonia,  opisthotonus):  try  procyclidine, 
eg 5–10mg IM or IV. Treat shock by raising the legs (± plasma expander IVI, or ino-
tropes if desperate). Restore body temperature. Monitor ECG. Use lorazepam IV for 
prolonged ﬁ ts in the usual way (p826). Neuroleptic malignant syndrome consists 
of: hyperthermia, rigidity, extrapyramidal signs, autonomic dysfunction (labile  BP, 
HR, sweating, urinary incontinence), mutism, confusion, coma, WCC, CK; it may be 
treated with cooling. Dantrolene 1–2.5mg/kg IV (p572) (max 10mg/kg/day) can help, 
bromocriptine and amantadine are alternatives.
Carbon tetrachloride poisoning This solvent, used in many industrial processes, 
causes vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, seizures, coma, renal failure, and tender 
hepatomegaly with jaundice and liver failure. IV acetylcysteine may improve prog-
nosis. Seek expert help.
Organophosphate insecticides Inactivate cholinesterase—the resulting increase 
in acetylcholine causes the SLUD response: salivation, lacrimation, urination, and di-
arrhoea. Also look for sweating, small pupils, muscle fasciculation, coma, respiratory 
distress, and bradycardia. Treatment: Wear gloves; remove soiled clothes. Wash 
skin. Take blood (FBC and serum cholinesterase activity). Give atropine IV 2mg every 
10min till full atropinization (skin dry, pulse >70, pupils dilated). Up to 3d treatment 
may be needed. Also give pralidoxime 30mg/kg IVI over 20min, then 8mg/kg/h, max 
12g in 24h. Even if ﬁ ts are not occurring, diazepam 5–10mg IV slowly seems to help.
Paraquat poisoning (Found in weed-killers.) This causes D&V, painful oral ulcers, 
alveolitis, and renal failure. Diagnose by urine test. Give activated charcoal at once 
(100g followed by a laxative, then 50g/3–4h). Get expert help. Avoid O2 early on 
(promotes lung damage).
Ecstasy  poisoning  Ecstasy  is  a  semi-synthetic,  hallucinogenic  substance  (MDMA, 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine). Its eff ects range from nausea, muscle pain, 
blurred  vision,  amnesia,  fever,  confusion,  and  ataxia  to  tachyarrhythmias,  hyper-
thermia, hyper/hypotension, water intoxication,  DIC, K+, acute kidney injury (AKI), 
hepatocellular and muscle necrosis, cardiovascular collapse, and ARDS. There is no 
antidote and treatment is supportive. Management depends on clinical and lab ﬁ nd-
ings, but may include:
  • Administration of activated charcoal and monitoring of BP, ECG, and temperature 

for at least 12h (rapid cooling may be needed).

  • Monitor urine output and U&E (AKI pp298–9), LFT, CK, FBC, and coagulation (DIC p352). 

Metabolic acidosis may beneﬁ t from treatment with bicarbonate.

  • Anxiety: lorazepam 1-2mg IV as a slow bolus into a large vein. Repeat doses may be 

administered until agitation is controlled (see p826).

  • Narrow complex tachycardias (p806) in adults: consider metoprolol 5mg IV.
  • Hypertension can be treated with nifedipine 5–10mg PO or phentolamine 2–5mg IV. 

Treat hypotension conventionally (p790).

  • Hyperthermia: attempt to cool, if rectal T° >39°C consider dantrolene 1mg/kg IV 
(may need repeating: discuss with your senior and a poisons unit). Hyperthermia 
with ecstasy is akin to serotonin syndrome, and propranolol, muscle relaxation, and 
ventilation may be needed.

Snakes (adders) Anaphylaxis: p794. Signs of envenoming: BP (vasodilation, vi-
per cardiotoxicity);  D&V; swelling spreading proximally within 4h of bite; bleeding 
gums or venepuncture sites; anaphylaxis; ptosis; trismus; rhabdomyolysis; pulmo-
nary oedema. Tests: WCC; abnormal clotting; platelets; U&E; urine RBC; CK; PaO2, 
ECG. Management: Avoid active movement of aff ected limb (so use splints/slings). 
Avoid incisions and tourniquets. Get help from local/national poisons service. Is 
antivenom indicated (IgG from venom-immunized sheep)?—eg 10mL IV over 15min 
(adults and children) of European Viper Antiserum (from Monviato) for adder bites 
(see BNF);—20mL if severe envenoming have adrenaline to hand—p794. Monitor ECG. 
For non-UK endemic snakes, see BNF.

_OHCM_10e.indb   843

_OHCM_10e.indb   843

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

844

Paracetamol poisoning

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

12g (=24 tablets) or 150mg/kg in adults may be fatal. If the patient weighs >110kg, 
calculate ingested dose using a body weight of 110kg to avoid underestimating toxic-
ity. If the patient is malnourished then 75mg/kg can kill.
Signs and symptoms None initially, or vomiting ±  RUQ pain. Later: jaundice and 
encephalopathy from liver damage (the main danger) ± acute kidney injury (AKI).
Management General measures: See p838. GI decontamination is recommended 
in those presenting <4h after overdose: give activated charcoal 1g/kg (max 50g).
Ω ; blood paracetamol level at 4h post-ingestion.
  • Glucose, U&E, LFT, INR, ABG, FBC, HCO3
  • If <10–12h since overdose, not vomiting, and plasma paracetamol is above the line 

on the graph (see ﬁ g 19.26), start acetylcysteine.

  • If >8–24h and suspicion of large overdose (>7.5g) err on the side of caution and 
start acetylcysteine, stopping it if level below treatment line and INR/ALT normal.
  • If ingestion time is unknown, or it is staggered, or presentation is >15h from inges-

tion, treatment may still help. Get advice.

Acetylcysteine is given by IVI: 150mg/kg in 5% glucose over 15–60min; then 50mg/
kg in 500mL of 5% glucose over 4h; then 100mg/kg/16h in 1L of 5% glucose. Rash is a 
common SE: treat with chlorphenamine + observe; do not stop unless anaphylatoid 
reaction with shock, vomiting, and wheeze (occur <10%). An alternative (if acetyl-
cysteine unavailable) is methionine 2.5g/4h PO for 16h (total: 10g), but absorption is 
unreliable if vomiting.
Ongoing management
  • Next day do INR, U&E, LFT. If INR rising, continue acetylcysteine until <1.4.
  • If continued deterioration, discuss with the liver team. Don’t hesitate to get help.
  • Consider referral to specialist liver unit guided by eg King’s College criteria (BOX, p275).

Salicylate poisoning 

Aspirin is a weak acid with poor water solubility. It is present in many over-the-
counter preparations. Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation leads to anaerobic 
metabolism and the production of lactate and heat. Eff ects are dose related and 
potentially fatal: •150mg/kg: mild toxicity. •250mg/kg: moderate •>500mg/kg: severe 
toxicity. Levels over 700mg/L are potentially fatal.
Signs and symptoms Unlike paracetamol, there are many early features:
  • Vomiting, dehydration, hyperventilation, tinnitus, vertigo, sweating.
  • Rarely GCS, seizures, BP and heart block, pulmonary oedema, hyperthermia.
Patients present initially with respiratory alkalosis due to a direct stimulation of 
the central respiratory centres and then develop a metabolic acidosis. Hyper- or 
hypoglycaemia may occur.
Management General: (pp838–9.) Correct dehydration. Keep patient on ECG monitor. 
Give activated charcoal to all presenting 1h—consider even if delayed presentation, 
slow-release formations, or bezoar formation (can delay absorption): at least one dose 
of 1g/kg (max 50g). Consider repeat doses (two further doses of 50g, 4h apart).
1      Bloods. Paracetamol  and  salicylate  level,  glucose,  U&E, LFT, INR, ABG,  HCO3

Ω,  FBC. 
Salicylate level may need to be repeated after 2h, due to continuing absorption 
if a potentially toxic dose has been taken. Monitor blood glucose 1–2hrly, beware 
hypoglycaemia, if severe poisoning, monitor salicylate levels, serum pH, and U&E.

2      Urine. Check pH, consider catheterization to monitor output and pH.
3      Correct  acidosis.  If  plasma  salicylate  level  >500mg/L  (3.6mmol/L)  or  severe 
metabolic acidosis, consider alkalinization of the urine, eg with 1.5L 1.26% so-
dium bicarbonate IV over 3h. Aim for urine pH 7.5–8. NB: monitor serum K+ as 
hypokalaemia may occur, and should be treated (caution if AKI).

4      Dialysis  may  well  be  needed  if  salicylate  level  >700mg/L,  and  if  AKI or  heart 
failure,  pulmonary  or  cerebral  oedema,  confusion  or  seizures,  severe  acidosis 
despite best medical therapy, or persistently plasma salicylate. Contact neph-
rology early.

Discuss any serious cases with the local toxicological service or national poisons 
information service. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   844

_OHCM_10e.indb   844

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Treatment line

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

l

P
a
s
m
a
-
p
a
r
a
c
e
t
a
m
o

l
c
o
n
c
e
n
t
r
a
t
i
o
n
(

m
m
o
l
/
l
i
t
r
e
)

845

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

)
e
r
t
i
l
/
g
m

(
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c
l

o
m
a
t
e
c
a
r
a
p
-
a
m
s
a
P

l

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Time (hours)

Fig 19.26  Plasma concentration of paracetamol vs time, see p844 for interpretation. The graph 
may mislead if HIV +ve (hepatic glutathione), or if long-acting paracetamol has been taken, or if 
pre-existing liver disease or induction of liver enzymes has occurred.

Reproduced from Drug Safety Update September 2012, vol 6, issue 2: A1 © Crown Copyright 2013.

_OHCM_10e.indb   845

_OHCM_10e.indb   845

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

 
 
 
 
 
846

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Burns
Assessment Burn size is important to assess as it inﬂ uences the size of the inﬂ am-
matory response (vasodilation, increased vascular permeability) and thus ﬂ uid shift 
from the intravascular volume. Use Lund and Browder charts (see ﬁ g 19.27) or the 
‘rule of nines’ (arm: 9%; front of trunk 18%; head and neck 9%; leg 18%; back of trunk 
18%; perineum 1%). Ignore erythema. Burn depth determines healing time/scarring; 
assessing this can be hard, even for the experienced. The big distinction is whether 
the burn is partial thickness (painful, red, and blistered) or full thickness (insensate/
painless; grey-white). NB: burns can evolve, particularly over the ﬁ rst 48h.
Resuscitation Resuscitate and arrange transfer to specialist burns unit for all major 
burns (>25% partial thickness in adults and >20% in children). Assess site, size, and 
depth of burn (ﬁ g 19.27, to help calculate ﬂ uid requirements). Referral is still war-
ranted in cases of full thickness burns >5%, partial thickness burns >10% in adults or 
>5% in children or the elderly, burns of special sites, chemical and electrical burns, 
and burns with inhalational injury.
  • Airway: Beware of upper airway obstruction developing if hot gases inhaled. Sus-
pect if history of ﬁ re in enclosed space, soot in oral/nasal cavity, singed nasal hairs 
or hoarse voice. A ﬂ exible laryngo/bronchoscopy is useful. Involve anaesthetists 
early and consider early intubation. Obstruction can develop in the ﬁ rst 24h.

  • Breathing: Exclude life-threatening chest injuries (eg tension pneumothorax) and 
constricting burns—consider escharotomy if chest burns are impairing thorax ex-
cursion (OHCS p766). Give 100% O2. Suspect carbon monoxide poisoning (p842) from 
history, cherry-red skin, and carboxyhaemoglobin level (COHb). With 100% O2 t½ 
of COHb falls from 250min to 40min (consider hyperbaric O2 if: pH<7.1; CNS signs; 
>25% COHb or >20% if pregnant). SpO2 (oxim etry) is unreliable in CO poisoning.
  • Circulation: Partial thickness burns >10% in a child and >15% in adults require IV 
ﬂ uid resuscitation. Put up 2 large-bore (14G or 16G) IV lines. Do not worry if you have 
to put these through burned skin; intraosseous access is valuable in infants and 
can be used in adults (see OHCS p236). Secure them well: they are literally lifelines.
Use a burns calculator ﬂ ow chart or a formula, eg: Parkland formula (popular): 4 ≈ 
weight (kg) ≈ % burn = mL Hartmann’s solution in 24h, half given in 1st 8h. Replace ﬂ u-
id from the time of burn, not from the time ﬁ rst seen in hospital. Formulae are only 
guides: adjust IVI according to clinical response and urine output; aim for 0.5mL/kg/h 
(1mL/kg/h in children), ~50% more in electrical burns and inhalation injury. Monitor 
T° (core and surface); catheterize the bladder. Beware of over-resuscitation (‘ﬂ uid 
creep’) which can lead to complications such as abdominal compartment syndrome.
Treatment ‘Cool the burn, warm the patient.’ Do not apply cold water to extensive 
burns for long periods: this may intensify shock. Take care with circumferential full-
thickness burns of the limbs as compartment syndrome may develop rapidly particu-
larly after ﬂ uid resuscitation. Decompress (escharotomy and fasciotomy) as needed. 
If transferring to a burns unit, do not burst blisters or apply any special creams as 
this can hinder assessment. Simple saline gauze or paraffi  n gauze is suitable; cling 
ﬁ lm is useful as a temporary measure and relieves pain. Titrate morphine IV for good 
analgesia. Ensure tetanus immunity. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not routinely used.
Deﬁ nitive dressings There are many dressings for partial thickness burns, eg bio-
logical  (pigskin,  cadaveric  skin),  synthetic,  and  silver  sulfadi azine  cream  alone  or 
with cerium nitrate as Flammacerium®; it forms a leathery eschar which resists 
infection. Major full-thickness burns beneﬁ t from early tangential excision and split-
skin grafts as the burn is a major source of inﬂ ammatory cytokines and forms a rich 
medium for bacterial growth.

_OHCM_10e.indb   846

_OHCM_10e.indb   846

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Smoke inhalation
Consider if:
  • History of exposure to ﬁ re and smoke 

in an enclosed space

  • Hoarseness or change in voice
  • Harsh cough
  • Stridor.

  • Burns to face
  • Singed nasal hairs
  • Soot in saliva or sputum
  • Inﬂ amed oropharynx

Initially laryngospasm leads to hypoxia and straining (leading to petechiae), then 
hypoxic cord relaxation leads to true inhalation injury. Free radicals, cyanide com-
pounds,  and  carbon  monoxide  (CO)  accompany  thermal  injury.  Cyanide  (p842) 
compounds (generated, eg from burning plastics) stop oxidative phosphorylation, 
causing dizziness, headaches, and seizures. Tachycardia + dyspnoea soon give way 
to brady cardia + apnoea. CO is generated later in the ﬁ re as oxygen is depleted. NB: 
COHb levels do not correlate well with the severity of poisoning and partly reﬂ ect 
smoking status and urban life. Use nomograms to extrapolate peak levels.
100% O2 is given to elute both cyanide and CO.
Involve ICU/anaesthetists early if any signs of airway obstruction or respiratory 
failure: early intubation and ventilation may be useful.
Enlist expert help in cyanide poisoning—see p842.

847

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Fig 19.27  Lund and Browder charts.

Acknowledgement
We thank Professor Tor Chiu for help in preparing this topic.

_OHCM_10e.indb   847

_OHCM_10e.indb   847

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

848

Hypothermia

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Have a high index of suspicion and a low-reading thermometer. Most patients 
are elderly and do not complain of, or feel, cold—so they have not tried to warm up. 
In the young, hypothermia is usually from cold exposure (eg near-drowning), or is 
secondary to impaired consciousness (eg following excess alcohol or drug overdose).
Deﬁ nition Hypothermia implies a core (rectal) temperature <35°C.
Causes In the elderly, hypothermia is often caused by a combination of factors:
  • Impaired homeostatic mechanisms: usually age-related.
  • Low room temperature: poverty, poor housing.
  • Impaired thermoregulation: pneumonia, MI, heart failure.
  • Reduced metabolism: immobility, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus.
  • Autonomic neuropathy (p505); eg diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s.
  • Excess heat loss: psoriasis and any other widespread dermatological diseases (ie TEN/

erythrodermic eczema).

  • Cold awareness: dementia, confusion.
  • Increased exposure to cold: falls, especially at night when cold.
  • Drugs: major tranquillizers, antidepressants, diuretics, alcohol.
The patient
  • If the patient is shivering then the hypothermia is mild, if they are not shivering 

despite temp <35°C then the hypothermia is severe.

  • Symptoms and signs include confusion, agitation, GCS, coma, bradycardia, hypo-

tension and arrhythmias (AF, VT, VF), especially if temp <30°C.

There are many stories of people ‘returning to life’ when warmed despite absence of vital 
signs, see BOX. It is essential to rewarm (see ‘Treatment’ later in topic) and re-examine.
Diagnosis Check oral or axillary T°. If ordinary thermometer shows <36.5°C, use a 
low-reading one PR. Is the rectal temperature <35°C? Infra-red ear thermometers 
can accurately reﬂ ect core temperature.
Tests Urgent U&E, plasma glucose, and amylase. Thyroid function tests; FBC; blood 
cultures. Consider blood gases. The ECG may show J-waves (ﬁ g 19.28).
Treatment Use ABCDE approach (p779)—but don’t expose to cold.
  • All patients should receive warm, humidiﬁ ed O2; ventilate if comatose or respira-

tory insuffi  ciency.

  • Remove wet clothing, slowly rewarm, aiming for rise of ½°C/h (check temperature, 
BP, HR, and respiratory rate every 30min) using blankets or active external warm-
ing (hot air duvets). If T° rising too quickly stop and allow to cool slightly. Rapid 
rewarming causes peripheral vasodilation and shock. A falling BP can be a sign of 
too rapid warming.

  • Warm IVI.
  • Cardiac monitor is essential (AF, VF, and VT can occur at any time during rewarming 

or on stimulation).

  • Consider antibiotics for the prevention of pneumonia (p166). Give these routinely in 

patients over 65yrs with T° <32°C.

  • Consider urinary catheter (to monitor renal function).
NB: in sudden hypothermia from immersion or profound hypothermia with cardiovas-
cular instability/cardiac arrest, the temperature needs to be raised rapidly. Options 
include warmed ﬂ uid lavage (intravesical, nasogastric, intrapleural, intraperitoneal) 
and intravascular warming (cardiopulmonary bypass, dialysis). In the event of car-
diac arrest, deﬁ brillation is usually unsuccessful if T° <30°C (consider amiodarone, 
bretylium). Resuscitation must continue until core T° >33°C (OHCS p786).
Complications Arrhythmias (if there is a cardiac arrest continue resuscitating until 
T° >33°C, as cold brains are less damaged by hypoxia); pneumonia; pancreatitis; AKI; 
DIC. Prognosis: Depends on age and degree of hypothermia. If age >70yrs and T° 
<32°C then mortality >50%.
Before  hospital  discharge  Anticipate  problems.  Will  it  happen  again?  What  is 
their network of support? Review medication (could you stop tranquillizers)? How is 
progress to be monitored? Liaise with GP/social worker.

_OHCM_10e.indb   848

_OHCM_10e.indb   848

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

849

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Fig 19.28  J-wave in hypothermia.

Courtesy of Dr R Luke and Dr E McLachlan.

‘I did not die but nothing of life remained...’
Remember  that  death  is  a  process  not  an  event,  and  that  in  hypothermia,  all 
processes are suspended: metabolism may slow to as much as 10% of baseline, 
drastically  diminishing  the  oxygen  requirements  of  all  tissues.  Perhaps  this  is 
what  Dante  had  in  mind  for  the  last  round  of  the  9th  circle  of  Hell,  in  which 
those  betraying  their  benefactors  are  encased  in  ice  (canto  XXXIV)  ‘Com’io  di-
venni allor gelato e ﬁ oco...Io non mori e non rimasi vivo—How frozen I then be-
came: I did not die but nothing of life remained’.
Human  records: 13 month old Canadian Erica Nordby came to life 2 hours af-
ter  her  heart  stopped  (core  T°:  16°C).   Anna  Bågenholm,  a  Swedish  trainee  or-
thopaedic surgeon, became trapped under freezing water covered by a layer of 
ice for 80 minutes following a skiing accident, suff ering a cardiac arrest (core 
T°: 13.7°C). After resuscitation and 20 days in intensive care, she regained con-
sciousness, suff ering no permanent brain damage. She is now a radiologist. Do 
not declare anybody dead until they are warm and dead. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   849

_OHCM_10e.indb   849

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

850

Major disasters

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

Planning All hospitals have a detailed Major  Incident  Plan, but additionally the 
tasks of key personnel can be distributed on individual Action Cards.
At the scene Call the police to notify them of the Major Incident and ask them to 
take command. They will set up a central command centre to assess and manage the 
incident, depending on casualty numbers they will inform multiple hospitals of the 
need to prepare for the imminent arrival of casualties.
Safety: Paramount—your own and others. Be visible (luminous monogrammed jack-
et) and wear protective clothing where appropriate (safety helmet; waterproofs; 
boots; respirator in chemical environment).
Triage: See OHCS p800. There are several commercial systems available to label pa-
tients so emergency personnel can see at a glance the scale of the incident. The key 
is to divide patients by the urgency of care/transfer to hospital:

1      Emergency (label RED = will die in a few minutes if no treatment)
2      Urgent (label YELLOW =will die in ~2h if no treatment)
3      Non-urgent (label GREEN = walking wounded/those who are stable and can wait)
4      Deceased (label BLUE/WHITE).

Communications: Essential; each emergency service will dispatch a control vehicle 
and will have a designated incident offi  cer for liaison. Support medical staff  from 
hospital report to the medical incident offi  cer (MIO)—he or she is usually the ﬁ rst 
doctor on the scene. Their job is to assess then communicate to the receiving hos-
pital the number + severity of casualties, to organize resupply of equipment and to 
replace fatigued staff . The  MIO must resist temptation to treat casualties as this 
compromises their role.
Equipment: Must be portable and include: intubation and cricothyrotomy set; intra-
venous ﬂ uids (colloid); bandages and dressings; chest drain (+ﬂ utter valve); amputa-
tion kit (when used, ideally 2 doctors should concur); drugs—analgesic: morphine; 
anaesthetic: ketamine 2mg/kg IV over >60s (0.5mg/kg is a powerful analgesic with-
out respiratory depression); limb splints (may be inﬂ atable); deﬁ brillator/monitor ± 
pulse oximeter.
Evacuation: Remember that with immediate treatment on scene, the priority for 
evacuation may be reduced (eg a tension pneumothorax—RED—once relieved can 
wait for evacuation and becomes YELLOW), but those who may suff er by delay at 
the scene must go ﬁ rst. Send any severed limbs to the same hospital as the patient, 
ideally chilled—but not frozen.
At the hospital A ‘major incident’ is declared. The ﬁ rst receiving hospital will take 
most of the casualties; the support hospital(s) will cope with overﬂ ow and may 
provide mobile teams so that staff  are not depleted from the ﬁ rst hospital. A control 
room is established and the medical coordinator ensures staff  have been summoned 
and informed of their roles, nominates a triage offi  cer, and supervises the best use of 
inpatient beds and ICU/theatre resources.

_OHCM_10e.indb   850

_OHCM_10e.indb   850

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Blast injuries
These may be caused by domestic (eg gas explosion) or industrial (eg mining) 
accidents, or by terrorist bombs. Death may occur without any obvious external 
injury. Injury occurs in a number of ways:
1      Blast wave: A transient (milliseconds) wave of overpressure expands rapidly 
producing cellular disruption, shearing forces along tissue planes (submuc osal/
subserosal haemorrhage) and re-expansion of compressed trapped gas—bowel 
perforation, fatal air embolism.

2      Blast wind: This can totally disrupt a body or cause avulsive amputations. Bod-

ies can be thrown and sustain injuries on landing.

3      Missiles:  Penetration  or  laceration  from  missiles  are  by  far  the  commonest 

injuries. Missiles arise from the bomb or are secondary, eg glass.
4      Flash burns: These are usually superﬁ cial and occur on exposed skin.
5      Crush injuries: Beware sudden death or acute kidney injury from rhabdomy-

olysis after release.

6      Contamination: There is increasing concern about the use of biological or radi-
oactive material in terrorist bombs. Even domestic or industrial blasts can scat-
ter chemicals widely and cause both superﬁ cial and penetrating contamination. 
Consider the location and mechanism of the blast, and seek advice.
7      Psychological injury: Eg post-traumatic stress disorder (OHCS p353).
Treatment:  Approach  the  same  as  any  major  trauma  (OHCS  p778).  Rest  and
observe any suspected of exposure to signiﬁ cant blast but without other injury. 
Gun-shot injury: see OHCS p789. Major blast injuries, whatever the cause, should be 
reported to the police for investigation.

851

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

_OHCM_10e.indb   851

_OHCM_10e.indb   851

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

20  References

Contents
Chapter 1 Thinking about medicine  852
Chapter 2 History and examination  853
Chapter 3 Cardiovascular medicine  853
Chapter 4 Chest medicine  856
Chapter 5 Endocrinology  858
Chapter 6 Gastroenterology  858
Chapter 7 Renal medicine  859
Chapter 8 Haematology  859
Chapter 9 Infectious diseases  859
Chapter 10 Neurology  860
Chapter 11 Oncology and palliative care  860
Chapter 12 Rheumatology  861
Chapter 13 Surgery  863
Chapter 14 Clinical chemistry  864
Chapter 15 Eponymous syndromes  864
Chapter 16 Radiology  867
Chapter 17 Reference intervals  867
Chapter 18 Practical procedures  867
Chapter 19 Emergencies  867

Chapter 1: Thinking about medicine
1  Davis K, Stremikis K, Squires D, et  al. Mirror,  mirror  on  the  wall:  How  the  performance  of  the  US 
healthcare system compares internationally. New York: The Commonwealth Fund, 2014. http://www.com-
monwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2014/jun/mirror-mirror
2  Appleby J. Spending on health and social care over the next 50 years. Why think long term? Lon-
don: The Kings Fund, 2013. https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/time-to-think-diff erently/publications/spending-
health-and-social-care-over-next-50-years
3  Begley A, Pritchard-Jones K, Biriot\i M, et al. Listening to patients with cancer: using a literary-based 
research method to understand patient-focused care. BMJ Open 2014; 4(10):e005550. http://bmjopen.bmj.
com/content/4/10/e005550
4  Francis R. Report of the Mid-Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public Enquiry. London: The Sta-
tionery Offi  ce, 2013. http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20150407084003/http://www.midstaff spub-
licinquiry.com/home
5  Saunders J. Compassion. Clin Med 2015; 15:121–4. http://www.clinmed.rcpjournal.org/content/15/2/121.
full.pdf+html
6  Mani N, Slevin N, Hudson A. What three wise men have to say about diagnosis. BMJ 2011; 343:d7769. 
http://www.bmj.com/content/343/bmj.d7769
7  Klein JG. Five pitfalls in decisions about diagnosis and prescribing. BMJ 2005; 330:781–4. http://www.bmj.
com/content/330/7494/781
8  Schulz K. Being wrong: Adventures in the margin of error. London: Portobello Books, 2011
9  Berlinger N. After harm: Medical error and the ethics of forgiveness. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins 
University Press, 2005
10  Little P, White P, Kelly J, et al. Randomised control trial of a brief intervention targeting predominantly 
non-verbal communication in general practice consultations. Br J Gen Pract 2015; 65(635):e351–6. http://
bjgp.org/content/65/635/e351.long
11  Heath I. A wolf in sheep’s clothing: a critical look at the ethics of drug taking. BMJ 2003; 327:856. http://
www.bmj.com/content/327/7419/856
12  Eley D, Wilkinson D, Cloninger CR. Physician understand thyself, and develop your resilience. BMJ Ca-
reers 2013; 18 April. http://careers.bmj.com/careers/advice/view-article.html?id=20011843
13  Academy of Royal Colleges. A code of practice for the diagnosis and conﬁ rmation of death. 2010. 
http://www.aomrc.org.uk/publications/reports-guidance/ukdec-reports-and-guidance/code-practice-
diagnosis-conﬁ rmation-death/
14  Steinhauser KE, Christakis NA, Clipp EC, et al. Factors considered important at the end of life by pa-
tients, family, physicians, and other care providers. JAMA 2000; 284(19):2476–82. http://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/193279
15  Ruegger J, Hodgkinson S, Field-Smith A, et al. Care of adults in the last days of life: summary of NICE 
guidance. BMJ 2015; 351:h6631. http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h6631
16  Sokol DK. Doing  clinical  ethics:  A  hands  on  guide  for  clinicians  and  others. Amsterdam: Springer 
Netherlands, 2012 
17  Sokol DK, McFadzean WA, Dickson WA, et al. Ethical dilemmas in the acute setting: a frame-work for 
clinicians. BMJ 2011; 343:d5528. http://www.bmj.com/content/343/bmj.d5528.long

_OHCM_10e.indb   852

_OHCM_10e.indb   852

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

853

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

18  Huxtable R. For and against the four principles of biomedical ethics. Clin Ethics 2013; 8(2/3):39–43
19  NICE. Depression: The treatment and management of depression in adults [CG90]. 2009, updated 
2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG90
20  NICE. Violence and aggression: Short-term management in mental health, health and community 
setting [NG10]. 2015. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng10
21  O’Mahony D, O’Sullivan D, Byrne S, et al. STOPP/START criteria for potentially inappropriate prescribing 
in older people: version 2. Age Ageing 2015; 44(2):213–8. https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-lookup/
doi/10.1093/ageing/afu145
22  Kurrle SE, Cameron ID, Geeves RB. A quick ward assessment of older patients by junior doctors. BMJ 
2014: 350:h607. http://www.bmj.com/content/350/bmj.h607
23  NICE.  Falls  in  older  people:  Assessing  risk  and  prevention  [CG161].  2013.  https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg161
24  Knight M, Tuff nell D, Kenyon S, et al. (eds) on behalf of MBRRACE-UK. Saving lives, improving mothers’ 
care: surveillance of maternal deaths in the UK 2012–2014 and lessons learned to inform maternity care 
from the UK and Ireland. Conﬁ dential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–2014. Oxford: 
National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford, 2016
25  Greenhalgh T. How to read a paper (5th edn). Oxford: Blackwell Books, 2014
26  Greenland S, Senn SJ, Rothman KJ, et al. Statistical tests, P values, conﬁ dence intervals, and power: a 
guide to misinterpretations. Eur J Epidemiol 2016; 31:337–50
27  Greenhalgh  T,  Howick  J,  Maskrey  N.  Evidence  based  medicine:  a  movement  in  crisis?  BMJ  2014; 
348:g3725. http://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.g3725

Chapter 2: History and examination
1  Spence D. The world is round. BMJ 2008; 336:1134
2  Magilner D. Localized cervical pruritus as the presenting symptom of a spinal cord tumor. Pediatr Emerg 
Care 2006; 22(10):746–7
3  Mackowiak  PA,  Wasserman  SS,  Levine  MM.  A  critical  appraisal  of  98.6  degrees  F,  the  upper  limit 
of  the  normal  body  temperature,  and  other  legacies  of  Carl  Reinhold  August  Wunderlich.  JAMA  1992; 
268(12):1578–80. http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/400116
4  Roghmann MC, Warner J, Mackowiak PA. The relationship between age and fever magnitude. Am J Med 
Sci 2001; 322(2):68–90. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002962915346103
5  Diskin  CJ.  Towards  an  understanding  of  oedema.  BMJ  1999;  318:1610.  http://bmj.com/cgi/content/
full/318/7198/1610
6  Cheung W, Yu PX, Little BM, et al. Anorexia and cachexia in renal failure—is leptin the culprit? Role of 
leptin and melanocortin signaling in uremia-associated cachexia. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16:2245–50. http://
www.jci.org/articles/view/22521
7  Rastogi V, Purohit P, Peters BP, et  al. Pulmonary infection with Serratia  marcescens.  Indian  J  Med 
Microbiol 2002; 20:167–8. http://www.ijmm.org/text.asp?2002/20/3/167/6946
8  Koumbourlis AC. Pectus excavatum: pathophysiology and clinical characteristics. Paediatr Respir Rev 
2009; 10(1):3–6. http://www.prrjournal.com/article/S1526-0542(08)00083-3/abstract
9  Anglin R, Yuan Y, Moayyedi P, et  al. Risk of upper gastrointestinal bleeding with selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors with or without concurrent nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory use: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2014; 109:811–19. http://www.nature.com/ajg/journal/v109/n6/full/
ajg201482a.html
10  NICE. Depression: The treatment and management of depression in adults [CG90]. 2009, updated 
2016. http://www.nice.org.uk/CG90
11  Ford AC, Marwaha A, Lim A, et  al. What is the prevalence of clinically signiﬁ cant endoscopic ﬁ nd-
ings in subjects with dyspepsia? Systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010; 
8(10):830–7. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=20541625
12  Hodkinson HM. Evaluation of a mental test score for assessment of mental impairment in the elderly. 
1972. Age and Ageing 2012; 41 Suppl 3:iii35–40. http://ageing.oxfordjournals.org/content/41/suppl_3/iii35.long
13  NICE guidelines: Chest pain of recent onset: assessment and diagnosis. Updated Nov 2016. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg95/chapter/Recommendations#people-presenting-with-stable-chest-pain
14  Moore C. A functional neuroimaging study of the variables that generate category-speciﬁ c object pro-
cessing diff erences. Brain 1999; 122 (Pt 5):943–62. http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/content/122/5/943.long
15  Assié G, Bahurel H, Bertherat J, et al. The Nelson’s syndrome... revisited. Pituitary 2004; 7:209–15. http://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11102-005-1403-y
16  Dickinson CJ, Martin JF. Megakaryocytes and platelet clumps as the cause of ﬁ nger clubbing. Lancet 
1987; 2(8573):1434–5. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(87)91132-9/abstract

Chapter 3: Cardiovascular medicine
1  Britton J. Bupropion: a new treatment for smokers. BMJ 2000; 321:65. http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/
full/321/7253/65
2  Hippisley-Cox J. Predicting cardiovascular risk in England and Wales. BMJ 2008; 336:1475. http://www.
bmj.com/content/336/7659/1475
3  Josan K, Majumdar SR, McAlister FA. The effi  cacy and safety of intensive statin therapy: a meta-analysis 
of randomized trials. CMAJ 2008; 178(5):576–84. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2244680/
4  Capewell S. “Chest pain—please admit”: is there an alternative? BMJ 2000; 320:951. http://www.bmj.com/
cgi/content/full/320/7240/951
5  Berk W. Clinical implications of low QRS complex voltage. J Emerg Med 1987; 5:305–10
6  Herzog C, Zwerner PL, Doll JR, et al. Signiﬁ cant coronary artery stenosis: comparison on per-patient 
and per-vessel or per-segment basis at 64-section CT angiography. Radiology 2007; 244(1):112–20. http://
radiology.rsna.org/con-tent/244/1/112.short
7  Aspirin for primary prevention of disease. http://www.nyrdtc.nhs.uk/docs/dud/DU_65_Aspirin.pdf
8  NICE. Unstable  angina  and  NSTEMI:  Early  management [CG94]. 2010, updated 2013. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg94

_OHCM_10e.indb   853

_OHCM_10e.indb   853

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

854

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

9  Nattel S, Opie LH. Controversies in atrial ﬁ brillation. Lancet 2006; 367:262. http://www.thelancet.com/
journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(06)68037-9/abstract
10  Behr ER, Veysey MJ, Berry D, et al. Optimum dose of digoxin. Lancet 1997; 349(9068):1845 http://www.
thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)61735-7/fulltext
11  The Digitalis Investigation Group. The eff ect of digoxin on mortality and morbidity in patients with 
heart failure. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:525–33. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199702203360801
12  NICE. General principles for treating people with stable angina. In Stable angina: Management [CG126], 
Chapter  1.3.  2011,  updated  2016.  https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg126/chapter/1-Guidance#general-
principles-for-treating-people-with-stable-angina
13  NICE. Chest pain of recent onset: Assessment and diagnosis [CG95]. 2010, updated 2016. http://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/CG95
14  Roffi   M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syn-
dromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J 2016; 37(3):267–315. 
http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/3/267.long
15  Task Force on the management of ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients 
presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J 2012; 33(20):2569–619. http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.
org/content/33/20/2569.long
16  Junghans C. Risk assessment after acute coronary syndrome. BMJ  2006; 333:1080. http://www.bmj.
com/content/333/7578/1079
17  Lichtman JH, Bigger JT, Blumenthal JA, et al. Depression and Coronary Heart Disease: Recommenda-
tions for Screening, Referral, and Treatment: A Science Advisory From the American Heart Association 
Prevention Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council 
on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: 
Endorsed by the American Psychiatric Association. Circulation 2008; 118:1768–75. http://circ.ahajournals.
org/content/118/17/1768.long
18  DVLA. Cardiovascular  disorders:  Assessing  ﬁ tness  to  drive. March  2016. https://www.gov.uk/guid-
ance/cardiovascular-disorders-assessing-ﬁ tness-to-drive
19  Gorenek B, Lundqvist C, Terradellas J, et al. Cardiac arrhythmias in acute coronary syndromes: position 
paper from the joint EHRA, ACCA, and EAPCI task force. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 2015; 4(4):386
20  Matteson EL, Kluge FJ. Think clearly, be sincere, act calmly: Adolf Kussmaul (February 22, 1822-May 28, 
1902) and his relevance to medicine in the 21st century. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2003; 15(1):29–34
21  Massimo M. Minimally invasive coronary surgery: fad or future? BMJ 1998; 316:88
22  NICE. Off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting [IPG377]. 2011. http://guidance.nice.org.uk/IPG377
23  Brown WR, Moody DM, Venkata R, Challa VR, et al. Longer duration of cardiopulmonary bypass is as-
sociated with greater numbers of cerebral microemboli. Stroke 2000; 31 707–13. http://stroke.ahajournals.
org/content/31/3/707
24  Perez-Silva  A,  Merino  J.  Frequent  ventricular  extrasystoles:  signiﬁ cance,  prognosis  and  treatment. 
ESC  E-J  Cardiol  Pract  2011;  9(17).  http://www.escardio.org/Journals/E-Journal-of-Cardiology-Practice/
Volume-9/Frequent-ventricular-extrasystoles-signiﬁ cance-prognosis-and-treatment
25  NICE.  Atrial  ﬁ brillation:  Management.  2014.  https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg180/chapter/1-
Recommendations
26  Lubitz SA, Magnani JW, Ellinor PT, et al. Atrial ﬁ brillation and death after myocardial infarction: risk 
marker or causal mediator? Circulation 2011; 123:2063–5. http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/123/19/2094.
abstract
27  Wyse DG, Waldo AL, DiMarco JP, et al. A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with 
atrial ﬁ brillation. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:1825–33. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa021328
28  Oral  H.  Circumferential  pulmonary-vein  ablation  for  chronic  atrial  ﬁ brillation.  N  Engl  J  Med  2006; 
354(9):934–41. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa050955
29  Phang R, Prutkin J, Ganz L. Overview of atrial ﬂ utter. UpToDate®.  2015. http://www.uptodate.com/
contents/overview-of-atrial-ﬂ utter?source=search_result&search=atrial+ﬂ utter&selectedTit le=1~150
30  Mant J. Warfarin vs aspirin for stroke prevention in elderly with atrial ﬁ brillation (the Birmingham 
Atrial  Fibrillation  Treatment  of  the  Aged  Study,  BAFTA):  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet  2007; 
370:493–503. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140673607612331/abstract
31  Bristow M, Saxon L, Boehmer J, et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy with or without an implantable 
deﬁ brillator in advanced chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004; 350(21):2140–50. http://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa032423 
32  NICE. Implantable  cardioverter  deﬁ brillators  and  cardiac  resynchronisation  therapy  for  arrhyth-
mias and heart failure [TA314]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta314
33  NICE. Chronic heart failure [CG108]. 2010. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg108
34  Patient. Palliative care of heart failure. 2016. http://www.patient.co.uk/showdoc/40024526/
35  McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, et al. The natural history of congestive heart failure: the Framing-
ham study. N Engl J Med 1971; 285(26):1441–6. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM197112232852601
36  Dargie HJ, McMurray JJ. Diagnosis and management of heart failure. BMJ  1994; 308:321–8. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2539274/
37  Levenson JW, McCarthy EP, Lynn J, et al. The last six months of life for patients with congestive heart fail-
ure. J Am Geriatr Soc 2000; 48(5 Suppl):S101–9. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.
tb03119.x/abstract
38  Cleland JG, McGowan J, Clark A, et al. The evidence for beta blockers in heart failure. BMJ 1999; 318:824–
5. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1115260/
39  Fonarow GC, Abraham WT, Albert NM, et al. Inﬂ uence of beta-blocker continuation or withdrawal on 
outcomes in patients hospitalized with heart failure: ﬁ ndings from the OPTIMIZE-HF program. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2008; 52(3):190–9
40  Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, et al. The eff ect of spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients 
with severe heart failure. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:709–17. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/reprint/341/10/709.pdf 
41  Taylor AL, Ziesche S, Yancy C, et al. Combination of isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine in blacks with 
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004; 351(20):2049–57. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/content/full/351/20/2049

_OHCM_10e.indb   854

_OHCM_10e.indb   854

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

855

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

42  Stewart S, McMurray JJ. Palliative care for heart failure. Time to move beyond treating and curing 
to  improving  the  end  of  life.  BMJ  2002;  325(7370):915–16.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1124429/
43  Addington-Hall  J.  Dying  from  heart  failure:  lessons  from  palliative  care.  BMJ  1998;  317(7164):961–2. 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1114039
44  NICE. Hypertension in adults: Diagnosis and management [CG127]. 2011, updated 2016. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg127
45  MacMahon S, Alderman MH, Lindholm LH, et al. Blood-pressure-related disease is a global health prior-
ity. Lancet 2008; 371:1480–2. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(08)60632-7/
fulltext
46  Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-speciﬁ c relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular 
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet 2003; 
361(9362):1060–13. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12493255
47  Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or older. 
N Engl J Med 2008; 58:1887–98. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/reprint/358/18/1887.pdf
48  Law M, Wald N, Morris J. Lowering blood pressure to prevent myocardial infarction and stroke: a new 
preventive strategy. Health Technol Assess 2003; 7(31):1–94. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/
PMH0015113/
49  SPRINT Research Group. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N 
Engl J Med 2015; 373(22):2103–16
50  ALLHAT Offi  cers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. The Antihyperten-
sive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive 
patients randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic. 
JAMA 2002; 288:2981–97. http://jama.ama-assn.org/content/288/23/2981.full
51  van den Meiracker AH, Dees A. Hypertensive crisis: deﬁ nition, pathophysiology and treatment. Ned 
Tijdschr Geneeskd 1999; 143(44):2185–90
52  Stollerman GH. Rheumatic carditis. Lancet 1995; 346:390–2
53  Albert D, Harel L, Karrison T. The treatment of rheumatic carditis: a review and meta-analysis. Medicine 
1995; 74:1–12
54  Koudy Williams J, Vita JA, Manuck SB, et al. Psychosocial factors impair vascular responses of coronary 
arteries. Circulation 1991; 84:2146–53
55  Steptoe A, Molloy GJ. Personality and heart disease. Heart 2007; 93:783–4
56  Huff man JC, Celano CM, Beach SR, et al. Depression and cardiac disease: epidemiology, mechanisms, 
and  diagnosis.  Cardiovasc  Psychiatry  Neurol  2013;  2013:695925.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti-
cles/PMC3638710/
57  Otto C. Aortic stenosis--listen to the patient, look at the valve. N Engl J Med 2000; 343:652–4. http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200008313430910
58  Chopra HL, Nanda N. Textbook of Cardiology (A Clinical & Historical Perspective). New Delhi: Jaypee 
Brothers Medical Publishers, 2012; 667
59  Soutter H. The repair of mitral stenosis. Br Med J 1925; 2(3379):603–6
60  Ogur G. Variable clinical expression of Holt-Oram syndrome in three generations. Turk J Pediatr 1998; 
40(4):613–18. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/articles/10028874/
61  British Heart Foundation. Inﬂ ammation and your heart: Endocarditis, pericarditis and myocarditis. 
2015. 
https://www.bhf.org.uk/publications/heart-conditions/medical-information-sheets/inﬂ ammation-
and-your-heart
62  Chambers J, Sandoe J, Ray S, et al. The infective endocarditis team: recommendations from an interna-
tional working group. Heart 2014; 100(7):524–7. http://heart.bmj.com/content/100/7/524.long
63  Durack D, Lukes AS, Bright DK. New criteria for diagnosis of infective endocarditis: utilization of speciﬁ c 
echocardiographic ﬁ ndings. Duke Endocarditis Service. Am J Med 1994; 96: 200–9.
64  Beeching N. Infectious Diseases. London: Wolfe, 1994; 136.
65  NICE. Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis: antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endo-
carditis in adults and children undergoing interventional procedures [CG64]. 2008, updated 2016. https://
www.nice.org.uk/Search?q=CG64
66  Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective en-
docarditis. Eur Heart J 2015; 36(44):3075–128. http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/36/44/3075.long
67  Caforio AL, Pankuweit S, Arbustini E, et al. Current state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, man-
agement, and therapy of myocarditis: a position statement of the European Society of Cardiology Working 
Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J 2013; 34:2636–48. http://eurheartj.oxfordjour-
nals.org/content/34/33/2636.long
68  Adler Y, Charron P, Imazio M, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of pericar-
dial diseases. BMJ 2002; 325(7370):915–16. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1124429/
69  Baumgartner H, Bonhoeff er P, De Groot NM, et al. ESC Guidelines for the management of grown-up 
congenital heart disease (new version 2010). Eur Heart J 2010; 31(23):2915–57. http://eurheartj.oxfordjour-
nals.org/content/31/23/2915.long
70  De Mozzi P, Longo UG, Galanti G, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve: a literature review and its impact on sport 
activity. Br Med Bull 2008; 85:63–85. http://bmb.oxfordjournals.org/content/85/1/63.long
71  NICE. Transcatheter endovascular closure of perimembranous ventricular septal defect [IPG336]. 
2010. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/IPG336
72  Bashore TM. Adult congenital heart disease: right ventricular outﬂ ow tract lesions. Circulation 2007; 
115(14):1933–47 http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/115/14/1933.long
73  Wang XM, Wu LB, Sun C, et al. Clinical application of 64-slice spiral CT in the diagnosis of the Tetral-
ogy of Fallot. Eur J Radiol 2007; 64(2):296–301. http://www.ejradiology.com/article/S0720-048X(07)00103-9/
abstract
74  Driver  and  Vehicle  Licensing  Agency.  Assessing  ﬁ tness  to  drive  -  a  guide  for  medical  profession-
als.  2016.  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/assessing-ﬁ tness-to-drive-a-guide-for-medical-
professionals

_OHCM_10e.indb   855

_OHCM_10e.indb   855

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

856

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Chapter 4: Chest medicine
1  Johnson DC. Importance of adjusting carbon monoxide diff using capacity (DLCO) and carbon monoxide 
transfer coeffi  cient (KCO) for alveolar volume. Respir Med 2000; 94(1):28–37. http://www.resmedjournal.
com/article/S0954-6111(99)90740-0/abstract
2  Spira A. Airway gene expression; a novel diagnostic test for lung cancer in smokers. Proc Amer Assoc 
Cancer Res 2006; 47:242
3  Doerschuk C. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis – is host defense awry? N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 547–9. 
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp068259
4  NICE. Pneumonia in adults: Diagnosis and management [CG191]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/cg191
5  Man SY, Lee N, Ip M, et al. Prospective comparison of three predictive rules for assessing severity of 
community-acquired pneumonia in Hong Kong. Thorax 2007 62:348–53. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2092476/
6  Lim  WS.  Severity  assessment  in  community-acquired  pneumonia:  moving  on.  Thorax  2007;  62:287–8. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2092475/
7  Kumar S, Hammerschlag MR. Acute respiratory infection due to Chlamydia pneumoniae: current status 
of diagnostic methods. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44(4):568–76. http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/44/4/568.
long
8  Stringer JR, Beard CB, Miller RF, et al. A new name for Pneumocystis from humans and new perspectives 
on the host-pathogen relationship. Emerg Infect Dis 2002; 8(9):891–6.
9  Kaplan JE, Benson C, Holmes KT, et al. Guidelines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic in-
fections  in  HIV-infected  adults  and  adolescents.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC,  2009.  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/rr5804a1.htm
10  Hui DS. Review of clinical symptoms and spectrum in humans with inﬂ uenza A/H5N1 infection. Respirol-
ogy 2008; 13 Suppl 1:S10–3. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18366521 
11  The Writing Committee of the World Health Organization (WHO) Consultation on Human Inﬂ uenza A/
H5. Avian Inﬂ uenza A (H5N1) Infection in Humans. N Engl J Med 2005; 353:1374–85. http://content.nejm.org/
cgi/content/full/353/13/1374
12  Engin A. Inﬂ uenza type A (H5N1) virus infection. Mikrobiyol Bul 2007; 41(3):485–94. http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17933264 
13  Public Health England. Avian inﬂ uenza: guidance and algorithms for managing human cases. 2014. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/avian-inﬂ uenza-guidance-and-algorithms-for-managing-
human-cases
14  Avian inﬂ uenza guidance and algorithms. http://www.hpa.org.uk/web/HPAweb&HPAwebStandard/
HPAweb_C/1195733851442
15  British  Thoracic  Society.  Guidelines  on  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome.  2004.  http://www.brit-
thoracic.org.uk/guidelines/severe-acute-respiratory-syndrome-guideline.aspx
16  Hui  DS.  An  overview  on  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS).  Monaldi  Arch  Chest  Dis  2005; 
63(3):149–57
17  Gumel AB, Nuño M, Chowell G. Mathematical assessment of Canada’s pandemic inﬂ uenza prepared-
ness plan. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 2008; 19(2):185–92. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2605860/
18  Pasteur MC, Bilton D, Hill AT, et al. British Thoracic Society guideline for non-CF bronchiectasis. Thorax 
2010; 65 Suppl 1:i1–58. http://thorax.bmj.com/content/65/Suppl_1/i1.long
19  Ramsey BW, Davies J, McElvaney NG, et al. A CFTR potentiator in patients with cystic ﬁ brosis and 
the  G551D  mutation.  N  Engl  J  Med  2011;  365(18):1663–72.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3230303/
20  Rehman A, Baloch NU, Janahi IA. Lumacaftor–ivacaftor in patients with cystic ﬁ brosis homozygous for 
Phe508del CFTR. N Engl J Med 2015; 373(18):1783–4. http://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMc1510466
21  Alton EW, Armstrong DK, Ashby D, et  al. Repeated nebulisation of non-viral CFTR gene therapy in 
patients with cystic ﬁ brosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2b trial. Lancet Respir 
Med 2015; 3(9):684–91. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4673100/
22  NICE.  Guidance  on  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  lung  cancer.  2011.  http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
CG121
23  Bertazzi PA. Descriptive epidemiology of malignant mesothelioma. Med Lav 2005; 96(4):287–303. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16457426
24  Tsiouris A, Walesby RK. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: current concepts in treatment. Nat Clin Pract 
Oncol 2007; 4(6):344–52. http://www.nature.com/nrclinonc/journal/v4/n6/full/ncponc0839.html
25  NICE. Lung cancer: Diagnosis and management [CG121]. 2011. http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG121
26  Agarwal R. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Chest 2009; 135:805–26. http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0012369209602099
27  Graf K. Five-years surveillance of invasive aspergillosis in a university hospital. BMC Infect Dis 2011; 
11:163. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3128051/
28  Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, et al. Voriconazole versus amphotericin B for primary ther-
apy of invasive aspergillosis. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:408–15. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJ-
Moa020191
29  Morfín-Maciel B, Barragán-Meijueiro Mde L, Nava-Ocampo AA. Individual and family household smok-
ing habits as risk factors for wheezing among adolescents. Prev Med 2006; 43(2):98–100. http://www.scien-
cedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0091743506001538
30  Størdal K, Johannesdottir GB, Bentsen BS, et al. Acid suppression does not change respiratory symp-
toms in children with asthma and gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux disease. Arch Dis Child 2005; 90(9):956–60. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1720585/
31  Douglas JD. If you want to cure their asthma, ask about their job. Prim Care Respir J 2005; 14(2):65–71. 
http://www.nature.com/articles/pcrj2004122
32  Holloway EA, West RJ. Integrated breathing and relaxation training (the Papworth Method) for adults 
with asthma in primary care: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2007; 62(12):1039–42. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2094294/

_OHCM_10e.indb   856

_OHCM_10e.indb   856

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

857

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

33  British Thoracic Society. Guidelines for the management of asthma. 2011. http://www.brit-thoracic.
org.uk/ClinicalInformation/Asthma/AsthmaGuidelines/tabid/83/Default.aspx
34  Cates  CJ,  Cates  MJ,  Lasserson  TJ.  Regular  treatment  with  formoterol  for  chronic  asthma:  seri-
ous  adverse  events.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2008;  4:CD006923.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD006923.pub2/abstract
35  Anon. Using beta 2-stimulants in asthma. Drug Ther Bull 1997; 35:1–4. 
36  NICE. Omalizumab for severe persistent allergic asthma [TA133]. 2007. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/TA133
37  Hensley MJ. Use of inhaled corticosteroids was associated with the development of cataracts. Evid 
Based Med 1998; 3:24. http://ebm.bmj.com/content/3/1/24.full.pdf+html
38  Anon. Beyond the lungs—a new view of COPD. Lancet 2007; 370:713. http://www.thelancet.com/jour-
nals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(07)61349-X/abstract
39  Wouters E. COPD: a chronic and overlooked pulmonary disease. Lancet 2007; 370:715–16. http://www.
thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(07)61352-X/abstract
40  Steiner M, Barton RL, Singh SJ, et  al. Nutritional enhancement of exercise performance in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 200358(9):745–51. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1746806/
41  Poole PJ, Black PN. Mucolytic agents for chronic bronchitis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2006;  3:CD001287.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.
CD001287.pub2/abstract
42  Soriano JB, Lamprecht B, Ramírez AS, et al. Mortality prediction in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease  comparing  the  GOLD  2007  and  2011  staging  systems:  a  pooled  analysis  of  individual  patient 
data.  Lancet  Respir  Med  2015;  3(6):443–50.  http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanres/article/PIIS2213-
2600(15)00157-5/abstract
43  Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerbations of COPD. N Engl J Med 2011; 364:1093–
103. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1008378
44  Nannini L, Cates CJ, Lasserson TJ, et al. Combined corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist in one 
inhaler versus separate components for COPD. Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2007; 4:CD003794. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17943798
45  Bernard GR, Artigas A, Brigham KL, et al. The American-European Consensus Conference on ARDS. 
Deﬁ nitions, mechanisms, relevant outcomes, and clinical trial coordination. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
1994; 149(3 Pt 1):818–24. http://www.atsjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1164/ajrccm.149.3.7509706
46  Diaz-Reganon Valverde G, Fernández Rico R, Iribarren Sarrías JL, et al. The administration of 20 ppm 
of inhaled nitric oxide produces a faster response than the inhalation of 5 ppm in adult respiratory distress 
syndrome. Rev Esp Anesthesiol Reanim 2000; 47(2):57–62
47  Afshari A, Brok J, Møller AM, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 
and acute lung injury in children and adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 7:CD002787. http://onlineli-
brary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD002787.pub2/abstract
48  Lamontagne F, Briel M, Guyatt GH, et al. Corticosteroid therapy for acute lung injury, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, and severe pneumonia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Crit Care 2010; 
25(3):420–35. http://www.jccjournal.org/article/S0883-9441(09)00234-2/abstract
49  Deal EN, Hollands JM, Schramm GE, et al. Role of corticosteroids in the management of acute res-
piratory distress syndrome. Clin Ther 2008; 30(5):787–99. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0149291808001823
50  Davies C, Gleeson FV, Davies RJ, et al. BTS guidelines for the management of pleural infection. Thorax 
2003; 58 Suppl 2:ii18–28. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1766018/
51  Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, et al. Prospective study of the association between sleep-disordered 
breathing  and  hypertension.  N  Engl  J  Med  2000;  342:1378–84.  http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJM200005113421901
52  NICE. Continuous positive airway pressure for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnoea/hypop-
noea syndrome [TA139]. 2008. http://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/TA139
53  Iannuzzi MC, Rybicki BA, Teirstein AS. Sarcoidosis. N Engl J Med 2007; 357(21):2153–65. http://www.
nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra071714 
54  Bradley B, Branley HM, Egan JJ, et al. Interstitial lung disease guideline: the British Thoracic Society 
in collaboration with the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand and the Irish Thoracic Society. 
Thorax 2008; 63(Suppl V):v1–v58. http://thorax.bmj.com/content/63/Suppl_5/v1.long
55  Grönhagen-Riska C. Angiotensin-converting enzyme. I. Activity and correlation with serum lysozyme in 
sarcoidosis, other chest or lymph node diseases and healthy persons. Scand J Respir Dis 1979; 60(2):83–93
56  Iannuzzi MC, Sah BP. Sarcoidosis. In: Merk Manual. http://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/pul-
monary_disorders/sarcoidosis/sarcoidosis.html
57  Evans M, Sharma O, LaBree L, et al. Diff erences in clinical ﬁ ndings between Caucasians and African 
Americans with biopsy-proven sarcoidosis. Ophthalmology 2007; 114(2):325–33. http://www.aaojournal.org/
article/S0161-6420(06)00994-8/abstract
58  Bradley B, Branley HM, Egan JJ, et al. Interstitial lung disease guideline: the British Thoracic Society 
in collaboration with the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand and the Irish Thoracic Society. 
Thorax 2008; 63:v1–v58 http://thorax.bmj.com/content/63/Suppl_5/v1.long
59  Watanabe  N,  Tanada  S,  Sasaki  Y.  Pulmonary  clearance  of  aerosolized  99mTc-DTPA  in  sarcoidosis  I 
patients. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2007; 51(1):82–90. http://www.minervamedica.it/en/journals/nuclear-
med-molecular-imaging/issue.php?cod=R39Y9999N00
60  Bradley B, Branley HM, Egan JJ, et al. Interstitial lung disease guideline: the British Thoracic Society 
in collaboration with the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand and the Irish Thoracic Society. 
Thorax 2008; 63(Suppl V):v1–v58. http://thorax.bmj.com/content/63/Suppl_5/v1.long
61  Fisher M, Nathan SD, Hill C, et al. Predicting life expectancy for pirfenidone in idiopathic pulmonary 
ﬁ brosis. J Manag Care Spec Pharm 2017; 23(3):S17–S24. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   857

_OHCM_10e.indb   857

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

858

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Chapter 5: Endocrinology
1  Simpson RW, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ. The prevention of type 2 diabetes—lifestyle change or pharmaco-
therapy? A challenge for the 21st century. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2003; 59(3):165–80. http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/m/pubmed/12590013/
2  Cartwright RD. The role of sleep in changing our minds: a psychologist’s discussion of papers on memory 
reactivation and consolidation in sleep. Learn Mem 2004; 11(6):660–3. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC534693/
3  Weetman  AP.  Autoimmune  thyroid  disease:  propagation  and  progression.  Eur  J  Endocrinol  2003; 
148(1):1–9. http://www.eje-online.org/content/148/1/1.long
4  Gale E. Is there really an epidemic of type 2 diabetes? Lancet 2003; 362:503–4. http://www.thelancet.com/
journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)14148-7/abstract
5  Inoue K, Matsumoto M, Akimoto K. Fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c as risk factors for type 2 diabetes. 
Diabet Med 2008; 25(10):1157–63. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02572.x/abstract
6  Westman EC, Yancy WS Jr, Mavropoulos JC, et al. The eff ect of a low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet 
versus a low-glycemic index diet on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2008; 
5:36. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2633336/
7  Hemmingsen B, Lund SS, Gluud C, et al. Intensive glycaemic control for patients with type 2 diabetes: 
systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ 2011; 
343:d6898. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3223424/
8  Zinman B, Lachin JM, Inzucchi SE. Empagliﬂ ozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabe-
tes. N Engl J Med 2015; 373(22):2117–28. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1600827
9  Dose Adjustment For Normal Eating (DAFNE). http://www.dafne.uk.com/
10  The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The eff ect of intensive treatment of 
diabetes on the development and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993; 329(14):977–86. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199309303291401
11  Belch J. Aspirin does not help as primary prevention in DM. BMJ 2008; 337:a1840. http://www.bmj.com/
cgi/content/full/337/oct16_2/a1840
12  Davidson MB, Wong A, Hamrahian AH, et al. Eff ect of spironolactone therapy on albuminuria in pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Endocr  Pract  2008; 
14(8):985–92. http://journals.aace.com/doi/abs/10.4158/EP.14.8.985
13  NICE.  Chronic  kidney  disease:  Early  identiﬁ cation  and  management  of  chronic  kidney  disease  in 
adults in primary and secondary care [CG73]. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg73
14  Murad MH, Coto-Yglesias F, Wang AT, et al. Clinical review: drug-induced hypoglycemia: a systematic 
review. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 94(3):741–5. http://press.endocrine.org/doi/pdf/10.1210/jc.2008-1416
15  Kapoor RR, James C, et al. Advances in the diagnosis and management of hyperinsulinemic hypogly-
cemia. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 2009; 5(2):101–12. http://www.nature.com/nrendo/journal/v5/n2/
full/ncpendmet1046.html
16  Geraghty M, Draman M, Moran D, et al. Hypoglycaemia in an adult male: a surprising ﬁ nding in pursuit 
of insulinoma. Surgeon 2008; 6(1):57–60
17  Abraham P, Avenell A, Park CM, et al. A systematic review of drug therapy for Graves’ hyperthyroidism. 
Eur J Endocrinol 2005; 153(4):489–98. http://www.eje-online.org/content/153/4/489.long
18  Kahaly GJ, Pitz S, Hommel G, et al. Randomized, single blind trial of intravenous versus oral steroid 
monotherapy in Graves’ orbitopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005; 90(9):5234–40. http://press.endocrine.
org/doi/pdf/10.1210/jc.2005-0148
19  Hedback G, Odén A. Recurrence of hyperparathyroidism; a long-term follow-up after surgery for prima-
ry hyperparathyroidism. Eur J Endocrinol 2003; 148(4):413–21. http://www.eje-online.org/content/148/4/413.
long 
20  Hoff  AO, Cote GJ, Gagel RF. Multiple endocrine neoplasias. Annu Rev Physiol 2000; 62:377. http://www.
annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.physiol.62.1.377 
21  Renehan AG, Brennan BM. Acromegaly, growth hormone and cancer risk. Best Pract Res Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2008; 22(4):639–57. http://pubmedhh.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi?id=18971124&from=cqsr
22  Etxabe J, Vazquez JA. Morbidity and mortality in Cushing’s disease: an epidemiological approach. Clin 
Endocrinol 1994; 40:479–84. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2265.1994.tb02486.x/abstract
23  Brosnan CM, Gowing NF. Addison’s disease. BMJ 1996; 312(7038):1085–7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2350885/
24  State Coroner for Western Australia. Failure to diagnose: Addison’s disease. 2007. http://www.racgp.
org.au/afp/200710/200710bird.pdf
25  Boyle JG, Davidson DF, Perry CG, et al. Comparison of diagnostic accuracy of urinary free metane-
phrines,  vanillyl  mandelic  acid,  and  catecholamines  and  plasma  catecholamines  for  diagnosis  of  pheo-
chromocytoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007; 92(12):4602–8. http://press.endocrine.org/doi/pdf/10.1210/
jc.2005-2668
26  Herrmann  HC,  Chang  G,  Klugherz  BD,  et  al.  Hemodynamic  eff ects  of  sildenaﬁ l  in  men  with  severe 
coronary  artery  disease.  N  Engl  J  Med  2000;  342(22):1622–6.  http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJM200006013422201
27  Minniti G, Gilbert DC, Brada M. Modern techniques for pituitary radiotherapy. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 
2009; 10(2):135–44. http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11154-008-9106-0 
28  Chanson P. Acromegaly. Presse Med 2009; 38(1):92–102. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19004612

Chapter 6: Gastroenterology
1  Al Moutran H. Microstomia. Medscape. 2015. http://www.emedicine.com/ent/topic148.htm
2  Batur P, Stewart WJ, Isaacson JH. Increased prevalence of aortic stenosis in patients with arteriovenous 
malformations  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract  in  Heyde  syndrome.  Arch  Intern  Med  2003;  163(15):1821–4. 
http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/755859
3  Unlugenc H, Guler T, Gunes Y, Isik G. Comparative study of the antiemetic effi  cacy of ondansetron, propo-
fol and midazolam in the early postoperative period. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2004; 21(1):60–5. http://pubmedhh.
nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi?id=14768925&from=cqsr

_OHCM_10e.indb   858

_OHCM_10e.indb   858

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

859

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

4  NICE. Dyspepsia and gastro-oesophageal reﬂ ux disease [CG184]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/Guid-
ance/cg184 
5  NICE. Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s: management [CG141]. 2012. https://www.nice.
org.uk/Guidance/cg141
6  NICE.  Suspected  cancer:  Recognition  and  referral  [NG12].  2015.  https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/
ng12
7  European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). ECCO Consensus on Surgery for Ulcerative Colitis. 
2016.  https://www.ecco-ibd.eu/index.php/publications/ecco-guidelines-science/published-ecco-guidelines.
html
8  European  Crohn’s  and  Colitis  Organisation  (ECCO).  ECCO  Crohn’s  Disease  (CD)  Consensus  Update 
(2016).  2016.  https://www.ecco-ibd.eu/index.php/publications/ecco-guidelines-science/published-ecco-
guidelines.html
9  Ludvigsson JF, Bai JC, Biagi F, et  al. Diagnosis and management of adult coeliac disease: guidelines 
from the British Society of Gastroenterology. Gut  63(8):1210–28. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti-
cles/PMC4112432/
10  Juturi JV, Maghfoor I, Doll DC, et al. A case of biliary carcinoid presenting with pancreatitis and ob-
structive jaundice. Am J Gastroenterol 2000; 95(10):2973–4. http://www.nature.com/ajg/journal/v95/n10/
full/ajg20001463a.html
11  Hillbom M, Pieninkeroinen I, Leone M. Seizures in alcohol-dependent patients: epidemiology, pathophysi-
ology and management. CNS Drugs 2003; 17(14):1013–30. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14594442
12  European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). EASL–EASD–EASO Clinical Practice Guide-
lines for the management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 2016; 64(6):1388–402. http://www.
journal-of-hepatology.eu/article/S0168-8278(15)00734-5/fulltext

Chapter 7: Renal medicine
1  Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of suspected bacterial urinary tract infec-
tion in adults: a national clinical guideline (SIGN 88). 2012. http://www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/sign88.pdf
2  Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work Group. KDIGO clinical 
practice guideline for acute kidney injury. Kidney Int Suppl 2012; 2:1–138. http://kdigo.org/home/guidelines/
acute-kidney-injury/
3  London  AKI  Network.  Guidelines  and  pathways.  http://www.londonaki.net/clinical/guidelines-path-
ways.html
4  NICE. Algorithms for IV ﬂ uid therapy in adults. 2013. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg174/resourc-
es/intravenous-ﬂ uid-therapy-in-adults-in-hospital-algorithm-poster-set-191627821
5  UK Renal Association. Clinical practice guidelines: treatment of acute hyperkalaemia in adults. March 2014. 
http://www.renal.org/guidelines/joint-guidelines/treatment-of-acute-hyperkalaemia-in-adults#sthash.
LACGYarj.dpbs
6  Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2012 clinical practice 
guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int Suppl 2013; 3:1–150. 
http://kdigo.org/home/guidelines/ckd-evaluation-management/
7  Evans PD, Taal MW. Epidemiology and causes of chronic kidney disease. Medicine 2015; 43:450–3. http://
www.medicinejournal.co.uk/article/S1357-3039(15)00117-6/fulltext
8  NICE.  Chronic  kidney  disease  in  adults:  Assessment  and  management  [CG182].  Updated  Jan  2015. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg182
9  Kidney  Disease:  Improving  Global  Outcomes  (KDIGO)  Glomerulonephritis  Work  Group.  KDIGO  clini-
cal  practice  guideline  for  glomerulonephritis.  Kidney  Int  Suppl  2012;  2:139–274.  http://kdigo.org/home/
glomerulonephritis-gn/
10  Molitch ME, Adler AI, Flyvbjerg A, et al. Diabetic kidney disease: a clinical update from Kidney Disease: 
Improving Global Outcomes. Kidney Int 2015; 87(1):20–30. http://www.kidney-international.theisn.org/arti-
cle/S0085-2538(15)30004-1/abstract

Chapter 8: Haematology
1  van der Klooster JM. A medical mystery. Lead poisoning. Singapore Med J 2004; 45(10):497–9. http://
pubmedhh.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi?id=15455173&from=cqsr
2  The  Joint  United  Kingdom  (UK)  Blood  Transfusion  and  Tissue  Transplantation  Services  Professional 
Advisory  Committee.  Transfusion  handbook  (5th  edn).  2014.  Available  free  at:  http://www.transfusion-
guidelines.org/transfusion-handbook
3  NICE. Neutropenic sepsis: Prevention and management in people with cancer [CG151]. 2012. https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg151

Chapter 9: Infectious diseases
1  Laxminarayan R, Duse A, Wattal C, et al. Antibiotic resistance - the need for global solutions. Lancet 
Infect  Dis  2013; 13(12):1057–98. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(13)70318-
9/abstract
2  NICE.  Antimicrobial  stewardship:  systems  and  processes  for  effective  antimicrobial  medicine  use 
[NG15]. 2015. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng15
3  NICE. Tuberculosis [NG33]. 2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng33
4  Public Health England. PHE guidance on the use of antiviral agents for the treatment and prophylaxis 
of seasonal inﬂ uenza. 2016. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
ﬁ le/580509/PHE_guidance_antivirals_inﬂ uenza_2016_2017.pdf
5  Goldacre B. What the Tamiﬂ u saga tells us about drug trials and big pharma. The Guardian 2014; 10 April. 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/10/tamiﬂ u-saga-drug-trials-big-pharma
6  British Association for Sexual Health and HIV. BASHH  guidelines. https://www.bashh.org/guidelines 
[accessed September 2016]

_OHCM_10e.indb   859

_OHCM_10e.indb   859

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

860

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

7  British HIV Association. British HIV Association guidelines for the treatment of HIV-1-positive adults 
with antiretroviral therapy 2015. 2015. http://www.bhiva.org/documents/Guidelines/Treatment/2015/2015-
treatment-guidelines.pdf
8  Loveday HP, Wilson JA, Pratt RJ, et al. epic3: National evidence based guidelines for preventing health-
care-associated infections in NHS hospitals in England. J Hosp Infect 2014; 86s1:s1–s70. https://www.his.
org.uk/ﬁ les/3113/8693/4808/epic3_National_Evidence-Based_Guidelines_for_Preventing_HCAI_in_NHSE.
pdf
9  Johnson V, Stockley JM, Dockrell D, et al. Fever in returned travellers presenting in the United Kingdom: 
recommendations for investigation and initial management. J Infect 2009; 59(1):1–18. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19595360
10  Lalloo DG, Shingadia D, Bell DJ. UK malaria treatment guidelines 2016. J Infect 2016; 72(6):635–49. http://
www.journaloﬁ nfection.com/article/S0163-4453(16)00047-5/abstract
11  Sinclair D, Donegan S, Iba R, et al. Artesunate versus quinine for severe malaria. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2012; 6:CD005967. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005967.pub4/full
12  via World Health Organization. Health topics. http://www.who.int/topics/en/ [accessed September 2016]
13  Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, et al. Zika virus and birth defects — reviewing the evidence for 
causality. N Engl J Med 2016; 374:1981–7. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338#t=article
14  Medlock JM, Leach SA. Eff ect of climate change on vector borne disease in the UK. Lancet Infect Dis 
2015; 15(6):721–30. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(15)70091-5/abstract
15  European concerted action on Lyme borreliosis (EUCALB). http://www.eucalb.com [accessed September 
2016]
16  Sudarshi  D,  Brown  M.  Human  African  trypanosomiasis  in  non-endemic  countries.  Clin  Med  2015; 
15(1):70–3. http://www.clinmed.rcpjournal.org/content/15/1/70.full.pdf
17  Lambourne JR, Brooks T. Brucella and coxiella: if you don’t look, you don’t ﬁ nd. Clin Med 2015; 15(1):91–2. 
http://www.clinmed.rcpjournal.org/content/15/1/91.abstract
18  Forbes AE, Zochowski WJ, Dubrey SW, et al. Leptospirosis and Weil’s disease in the UK. QJM 2012; 
105(2):1151–62. http://qjmed.oxfordjournals.org/content/105/12/1151.long
19  World Health Organization. Clinical management of patients with viral haemorrhagic fever: a pocket 
guide for front-line health workers: interim emergency guidance for country adaptation. 2016. http://
apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/205570/1/9789241549608_eng.pdf?ua=1
20  Barrett J, Brown M. Traveller’s diarrhoea. BMJ 2016; 353:i1937. http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.
i1937.long
21  Riddle MS, DuPont HL, Connor BA. ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of acute 
diarrheal infections in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 2016; 111:602–22. doi:10.1038/ajg.2016.126. http://gi.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/05/ajg2016126a.pdf
22  Beeching N, Dassanayake A. Tropical liver disease. Medicine 2011; 39(9):556–60. http://www.medicine-
journal.co.uk/article/S1357-3039(11)00154-X/abstract
23  Rodrigo C, Fernando D, Rajapakse S. Pharmacological management of tetanus: an evidence based re-
view. Crit Care 2014; 18:217. https://ccforum.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/cc13797
24  Varghese GM, Trowbridge P, Doherty T. Investigating and managing pyrexia of unknown origin. BMJ 
2010; 341:c5470. http://www.bmj.com/content/341/bmj.c5470.long

Chapter 10: Neurology
1  NICE. Headaches in over 12s: Diagnosis and management [CG150]. 2012. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/cg150
2  NICE. Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke [TA264]. 2012. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
ta264
3  NICE. Delirium: Prevention, diagnosis and management [CG103]. 2010. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/cg103
4  Fong TG, Davis D, Growdon ME, et al. The interface between delirium and dementia in elderly adults. 
Lancet Neurol 2015; 14(8):823–32. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4535349/
5  NICE. Dementia: Supporting people with dementia and their carers in health and social care [CG42]. 
2006, updated 2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg42 
6  NICE. Donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease 
[TA217]. 2011. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta217
7  Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al. Revised terminology and concepts for organization of seizures and 
epilepsies: report of the ILAE Commission on Classiﬁ cation and Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia 2010; 
51(4):676–85. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20196795
8  NICE. Multiple sclerosis in adults: Management [CG186]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg186

Chapter 11: Oncology and palliative care
1  Cancer Research. UK statistics. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics 
[accessed September 2016]
2  National Cancer Institute. Communication in cancer health: professional version. http://www.cancer.
gov/about-cancer/coping/adjusting-to-cancer/communication-hp-pdq#section/_9
3  Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R, et al. SPIKES: a six-step protocol for delivering bad news: application 
to  the  patient  with  cancer.  Oncologist  2000;  5(4):302–11.  http://theoncologist.alphamedpress.org/con-
tent/5/4/302.long
4  National Cancer Institute. The genetics of cancer. 2015. https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-
prevention/genetics/overview-pdq
5  NICE. Familial breast cancer: Classiﬁ cation, care and managing breast cancer and related risks in 
people with a family history of breast cancer [CG164]. 2013, updated 2015. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/cg164
6  NICE. Suspected cancer: Recognition and referral [NG12]. 2015. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng12
7  Kerr DJ, Haller DG, Verweij J. Principles of chemotherapy. In Kerr DJ, Haller DG, van der Valde CJH, et al. 
(eds) Oxford Textbook of Oncology (3rd edn). Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2016:186–95

_OHCM_10e.indb   860

_OHCM_10e.indb   860

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

861

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

8  Pérez Fidalgo JA, García Fabregat L, Cervantes A, et al. Management of chemotherapy extravasation: 
ESMO–EONS Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol 2012; 23(suppl 7): vii167–vii173. https://academic.oup.
com/annonc/article/23/suppl_7/vii167/145139/Management-of-chemotherapy-extravasation-ESMO-EONS
9  Loren AW, Mangu PB, Beck LN, et al. Fertility preservation for patients with cancer: American Society of 
Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31(19):2500–10. http://ascopubs.org/
doi/full/10.1200/JCO.2013.49.2678
10  Ahmad SS, Duke S, Jena R, et al. Advances in radiotherapy. BMJ 2012; 345e7765. http://www.bmj.com/
content/345/bmj.e7765.long
11  DeAngelo D, Alyea EP. Oncologic emergencies. In: Singh AK, Loscalzo J (eds) The Brigham Intensive 
Review of Internal Medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014:159–67
12  Lee DLY, Anthoney A. Complications of systemic therapy – gut infections and acute diarrhoea. Clin Med 
14(5):528–45. http://www.clinmed.rcpjournal.org/content/14/5/528.full.pdf+html
13  Pelosof LC, Gerber DE. Paraneoplastic syndromes: an approach to diagnosis and treatment. Mayo Clin 
Proc 2010; 85(9):838–54. http://www.mayoclinicproceedings.org/article/S0025-6196(11)60214-0/abstract
14  Sturgeon CM, Lai LC, Duff y MJ. Serum tumour markers: how to order and interpret them. BMJ 2009; 
339:b3527. http://www.bmj.com/content/339/bmj.b3527.long
15  Schröder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and prostate cancer mortality: results of the Eu-
ropean Randomised Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) at 13 years of follow up. Lancet 2014; 
384(9959):2027–35. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(14)60525-0/abstract
16  Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non-small-cell 
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:733–42. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1000678
17  World Health Organization. Analgesic ladder. http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/painladder/en/
18  NHS England. NPSA safety alert: Risk of distress and death from inappropriate doses of naloxone 
in  patients  on  long-term  opioid/opiate  treatment.  2014.  https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/up-
loads/2014/11/psa-inappropriate-doses-naloxone.pdf
19  NHS Scotland. Scottish palliative care guidelines. 2014. http://www.palliativecareguidelines.scot.nhs.
uk/
20  Universities of Hull, Staff ordshire and Aberdeen. Spiritual care at the end of life: A systematic review. 
2010.  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁ le/215798/dh_123804.
pdf
21  Kaye P. Spiritual pain. In: Notes on symptom control in hospice and palliative care. Hospice Education 
Institute. 1990.
22  Ruegger J, Hodgkinson S, Field-Smith A, et al. Care of adults in the last days of life. BMJ 2015; 351:h6631. 
http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h6631
23  General Medical Council. Treatment and care towards the end of life. 2010. http://www.gmc-uk.org/
static/documents/content/Treatment_and_care_towards_the_end_of_life_-_English_1015.pdf

Chapter 12: Rheumatology
1  Doherty M, Dacre J, Dieppe P, et al. The ‘GALS’ locomotor screen. Ann Rheum Dis 1992; 51:1165–9. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1012427/
2  Courtney P, Doherty M. Joint aspiration and injection. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2005; 19:345–69. 
http://www.bprclinrheum.com/article/S1521-6942(05)00010-0/abstract
3  Speed C. Low back pain. BMJ 2004; 328:1119–21. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC406328/
4  NICE. Low back pain in adults: Early management [CG88]. 2009. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg88
5  Woolf  AD,  Pﬂ eger  B.  Burden  of  major  musculoskeletal  conditions.  Bull  World  Health  Organ  2003; 
81(9):646–56. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2572542/
6  Sowers M, Jannausch M, Stein E, et al. C-reactive protein as a biomarker of emergent osteoarthritis. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2002; 10(8):595–601. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12479380
7  NICE. Osteoarthritis: Care and management [CG177]. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg177
8  Bellamy N, Campbell J, Robinson V, et al. Viscosupplementation for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the 
knee. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 2:CD005321. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.
CD005321.pub2/abstract
9  García-De La Torre I. Advances in the management of septic arthritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2003; 
29(1):61–75. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12635500
10  Ross JJ, Saltzman CL, Carling P, et al. Pneumococcal septic arthritis: review of 190 cases. Clin Infect Dis 
2003; 36(3):319–27. http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/36/3/319.long
11  Coakley G, Mathews C, Field M, et al. BSR & BHPR, BOA, RCGP and BSAC guidelines for management 
of the hot swollen joint in adults, 2006. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2006; 45(8):1039–41. http://rheumatology.
oxfordjournals.org/content/45/8/1039.long
12  Mathews CJ, Kingsley G, Field M, et al. Management of septic arthritis: a systematic review. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2007; 66(4):440–5. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1856038/
13  Blizard Institute Clinical Eff ectiveness Group. NSAIDs: Reducing the risk summary guidelines. 2015. 
http://www.blizard.qmul.ac.uk/ceg-resource-library/clinical-guidance/clinical-guidelines.html
14  McGettigan  P,  Henry  D.  Cardiovascular  risk  with  non-steroidal  anti-inﬂ ammatory  drugs:  systematic 
review of population-based controlled observational studies. PLoS Med 2011; 8(9):e1001098. https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3181230/
15  Scarpignato C, Lanas A, Blandizzi C, et al. Safe prescribing of non-steroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs 
in patients with osteoarthritis – an expert consensus addressing beneﬁ ts as well as gastrointestinal and 
cardiovascular risks. International NSAID Consensus Group. BMC Med 2015; 13:55. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4365808/
16  Chan F, Wong VW, Suen BY, et al. Combination of COX-2 and PPI for prevention of recurrent ulcer 
bleeding in patients at very high risk. Lancet 2007; 369:1621–6. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(07)60749-1/abstract
17  Calgüneri M, Ureten K, Akif Oztürk M,  et  al. Extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis: 
results of a university hospital of 526 patients in Turkey. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2006; 24(3):305–8. http://www.
clinexprheumatol.org/article.asp?a=2873 

_OHCM_10e.indb   861

_OHCM_10e.indb   861

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

862

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

18  Young  A,  Koduri  G.  Extra-articular  manifestations  and  complications  of  rheumatoid  arthritis.  Best 
Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2007; 21(5):907–27. http://www.bprclinrheum.com/article/S1521-6942(07)00063-
0/abstract
19  Farid SS, Azizi G, Mirshaﬁ ey A. Anti-citrullinated protein antibodies and their clinical utility in rheuma-
toid arthritis. Int J Rheum Dis 2013; 16(4):379–86. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1756-185X.12129/
abstract
20  Brown AK, Wakeﬁ eld RJ, Conaghan PG, et al. New approaches to imaging early inﬂ ammatory arthri-
tis. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2004; 22(5 Suppl 35): S18–25. http://www.clinexprheumatol.org/article.asp?a=2432
21  Szekanecz Z, Kerekes G, Dér H, et al. Accelerated atherosclerosis in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 2007; 1108:349–58. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1196/annals.1422.036/abstract
22  Aletaha D, Neogi T, Silman AJ, et  al. 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classiﬁ cation criteria: an American 
College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheum 
2010; 62(9):2569–81. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.27584/abstract
23  O’Dell JR. Therapeutic strategies for rheumatoid arthritis. N  Engl  J  Med  2004; 350:2591–602. http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra040226 
24  British Society for Rheumatology. National guidelines for the monitoring of second line drugs. 2000. http://
www.rheumatology.org.uk/includes/documents/cm_docs/2009/m/monitoring_second_line_drugs.pdf 
25  NICE. Adalimumab, etanercept and inﬂ iximab for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis [TA130]. 
2007. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta130
26  NICE. Adalimumab, etanercept, inﬂ iximab, rituximab and abatacept for the treatment of rheuma-
toid arthritis after the failure of a TNF inhibitor [TA195]. 2010. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta195
27  NICE. Tocilizumab for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis [TA247]. 2012. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ta247
28  NICE. Abatacept for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis after the failure of conventional disease-
modifying anti-rheumatic drugs [TA234]. 2011. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta234
29  Ramiro S, Gaujoux-Viala C, Nam JL, et al. Safety of synthetic and biological DMARDs: a systematic lit-
erature review informing the 2013 update of the EULAR recommendations for management of rheumatoid 
arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73(3):529–35
30  Thompson A, Gandhi KK, Hochberg MC, et al. Incidence of malignancy in adult patients with rheu-
matoid  arthritis:  a  meta-analysis.  Arthritis  Res  Ther  2015;  17(1):212.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4536786/
31  Zhang W, Doherty M, Pascual E, et al. EULAR evidence based recommendations for gout. Part I: Di-
agnosis. Report of a task force of the Standing Committee for International Clinical Studies Including 
Therapeutics (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis 2006; 65(10):1301–11. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1798330/
32  Sturrock R. Gout. Easy to misdiagnose. BMJ 2000; 320:132–3. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti-
cles/PMC1128728/
33  Jordan KM, Cameron JS, Snaith M, et al. British Society for Rheumatology and British Health Profes-
sionals in Rheumatology guideline for the management of gout. Rheumatology 2007; 46(8):1372–4. http://
rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/content/46/8/1372.full
34  Cronstein BN, Terkeltaub R. The inﬂ ammatory process of gout and its treatment. Arthritis Res Ther 
2006; 8 Suppl 1:S3. https://arthritis-research.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/ar1908
35  Becker MA, Schumacher HR Jr, Wortmann RL, et al. Febuxostat compared with allopurinol in patients 
with hyperuricemia and gout. N Engl J Med 2005; 353(23):2450–61. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMoa050373
36  Zhang W, Doherty M, Bardin T, et al. EULAR recommendations for calcium pyrophosphate deposition. 
Part II: Management. Ann Rheum Dis 2011; 70:571–5. http://ard.bmj.com/content/70/4/571.full
37  Wanders A, Heijde DV, Landewe R, et  al. Nonsteroidal antiinﬂ ammatory drugs reduce radiographic 
progression  in  patients  with  ankylosing  spondylitis:  a  randomized  clinical  trial.  Arthritis  Rheum  2005; 
52(6):1756–65. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15934081
38  NICE. Adalimumab, etanercept and inﬂ iximab for ankylosing spondylitis [TA143]. 2008. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/ta143
39  Hakim A, Clunie G, Haq I (eds). Oxford handbook of rheumatology (3rd edn). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2011
40  Di Lorenzo AL. HLA-B27 syndromes. Medscape. 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1201027-
overview
41  Distler JH, Distler O. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the treatment of ﬁ brotic diseases such as systemic 
sclerosis: towards molecular targeted therapies. Ann Rheum Dis 2010; 69 Suppl 1:i48–51. http://ard.bmj.
com/content/69/Suppl_1/i48.long
42  Gross WL, Reinhold-Keller E. [ANCA-associated vasculitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss 
syndrome, microscopic polyangiitis). 1. Systemic aspects, pathogenesis and clinical aspects.] Z Rheumatol 
1995; 54(5):279–90. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8578884
43  Rahman A. Systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:929–39. http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMra071297
44  NICE. Final appraisal determination. Belimumab for treating active autoantibody-positive systemic 
lupus  erythematosus.  2016.  https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/GID-TAG273/documents/ﬁ nal-appraisal-
determination-document
45  Goral S, Ynares C, Shappell SB, et al. Recurrent lupus nephritis in renal transplant recipients revisited: it 
is not rare. Transplantation 2003; 75(5):651–6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12640304 
46  Baglin TP, Keeling DM, Watson HG. British Committee for Standards in Haematology. Guidelines on oral 
anticoagulation (warfarin): third edition - 2005 update. Br J Haematol 2006; 132(3):277–85. https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16409292
47  Petri M, Orbai AM, Alarcón GS, et al. Derivation and validation of the Systemic Lupus International 
Collaborating  Clinics  classiﬁ cation  criteria  for  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Arthritis  Rheum  2012; 
64(8):2677–86. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3409311/
48  Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012 Revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference 
Nomenclature of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum 2012; 65(1):1–11
49  Trejo-Gutierrez JF, Larson JM, Abril A. Shortness of breath, weak pulses, and a high ESR. Lancet 2008; 
371:176. http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(08)60109-9.pdf

_OHCM_10e.indb   862

_OHCM_10e.indb   862

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

863

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

50  Dasgupta B, Borg FA, Hassan N, et al. BSR and BHPR guidelines for the management of GCA. Rheuma-
tology (Oxford) 2010; 49(8):1594–7. http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.org/content/49/8/1594.long
51  Dasgupta  B,  Giant  Cell  Arteritis  Guideline  Development  Group.  Concise  guidance:  diagnosis  and 
management of giant cell arteritis. Clin Med (Lond) 2010; 10(4):381–6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/20849016
52  Stephens RS, Brown C. Persistent lower abdominal and groin pain: what is the diagnosis? Am J Med 
2005; 118(4):364–7. http://www.amjmed.com/article/S0002-9343(05)00088-4/abstract
53  Weiner  SM,  Peter  HH.  Neuropsychiatric  involvement  in  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Part  1: 
clinical  presentation  and  pathogenesis.  Med  Klin  2002;  97(12):730–7.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/12491066 
54  Reilly  PA,  Littlejohn  GO.  Peripheral  arthralgic  presentation  of  ﬁ brositis/ﬁ bromyalgia  syndrome.  J 
Rheum 1992; 19:281–3 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1629829
55  Richards SC, Scott DL. Prescribed exercise in people with ﬁ bromyalgia: parallel group randomised con-
trolled trial. BMJ 2002; 325:185–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC117444/
56  Busch AJ, Schachter CL, Overend TJ, et al. Exercise for ﬁ bromyalgia: a systematic review. J Rheumatol 
2008; 35:1130–44. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18464301
57  Goldenberg DL. Multidisciplinary modalities in the treatment of ﬁ bromyalgia. J Clin Psychiatry 2008; 69 
Suppl 2:25–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18537461
58  NICE.  Chronic  fatigue  syndrome/myalgic  encephalomyelitis  (or  encephalopathy):  Diagnosis  and 
management [CG53]. 2007. https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/cg53
59  New Zealand Guidelines Group. New Zealand acute low back pain guide. 2004. http://www.acc.co.nz/
PRD_EXT_CSMP/groups/external_communications/documents/guide/prd_ctrb112930.pdf 
60  Schneider M, Vernon H, Ko G, et al. Chiropractic management of ﬁ bromyalgia syndrome: a system-
atic review of the literature. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 2009; 32:25–40. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19121462
61  Russell IJ, Orr MD, Littman B, et al. Elevated cerebrospinal ﬂ uid levels of substance P in patients with the 
ﬁ bromyalgia syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 1994; 37:1593–601. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7526868
62  Russell IJ, Vaeroy H, Javors M, et al. Cerebrospinal ﬂ uid biogenic amine metabolites in ﬁ bromyalgia/
ﬁ brositis syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1992; 35:550–6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/1374252
63  Wood PB, Schweinhardt P, Jaeger E, et al. Fibromyalgia patients show an abnormal dopamine response 
to pain. Eur J Neurosci 2007; 25:3576–82. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17610577
64  Reichrath J, Bens G, Bonowitz A, et al. Treatment recommendations for pyoderma gangrenosum: an 
evidence-based  review  of  the  literature  based  on  more  than  350  patients.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol  2005; 
53(2):273–83. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16021123

Chapter 13: Surgery
1  American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the 
use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients 
undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Com-
mittee on Standards and Practice Parameters. Anesthesiology 2011; 114(3):495–511. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/21307770
2  General Medical Council. Consent: Patients and doctors making decisions together. 2008. http://www.
gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/consent_guidance_index.asp
3  BAPEN. Screening & ‘MUST’. 2016. http://www.bapen.org.uk/screening-and-must/must
4  NICE.  Anticoagulation—oral  [Clinical  Knowledge  Summaries].  2015.  http://cks.nice.org.uk/anticoagu-
lation-oral#!management
5  NIE. Ipilimumab for previously treated advanced (unresectable or metastatic) melanoma [TA268]. 
2012. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta268
6  Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic 
melanoma. N Engl J Med 2010; 363(8):711–23. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1003466
7  NICE. Early and locally advanced breast cancer: Diagnosis and treatment [CG80]. 2009. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg80
8  NICE. Advanced breast cancer: Diagnosis and treatment [CG81]. 2009, updated 2014. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg81
9  NICE. Obesity: Identiﬁ cation, assessment and management [CG189]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg189.
10  Halpin V. Early cholecystectomy. BMJ  Best  Practice. http://bestpractice.bmj.com/best-practice/evi-
dence/intervention/0411/0/sr-0411-i1.html
11  NICE. Varicose veins: Diagnosis and management [CG168]. 2013. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg168

Chapter 14: Clinical chemistry
1  NICE. Intravenous ﬂ uid therapy in adults in hospital [CG174]. 2013. https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/
cg174
2  Levey A, Bosch JP, Lewis JB, et al. A more accurate method to estimate glomerular ﬁ ltration rate from 
serum creatinine: a new prediction equation. Modiﬁ cation of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1999; 130:461–70. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10075613
3  Renneboog  B,  Musch  W,  Vandemergel  X,  et  al.  Mild  chronic  hyponatremia  is  associated  with  falls, 
unsteadiness,  and  attention  deﬁ cits.  Am  J  Med  2006;  119:71.e1–8.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/16431193
4  Robertson GL. Vaptan for the treatment of hyponatraemia. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2011; 7:151–61. http://
www.nature.com/nrendo/journal/v7/n3/full/nrendo.2010.229.html 
5  Smellie S. Spurious hypokalaemia. BMJ 2007; 334:693. http://www.bmj.com/content/334/7595/693 
6  Thomas J, Doherty SM. HIV infection--a risk factor for osteoporosis. J Acquir Immune Deﬁ c Syndr 2003; 
33(3):281–91. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12843738

_OHCM_10e.indb   863

_OHCM_10e.indb   863

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

864

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

7  Patel AM, Goldfarb S. Got calcium? Welcome to the calcium-alkali syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 
9:1440–3. http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/21/9/1440.long
8  Berenson JR. Treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy with bisphosphonates. Semin Oncol 2002; 29(6 
Suppl 21):12–18. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12584690
9  LeGrand SB, Leskuski D, Zama I. Narrative review: furosemide for hypercalcemia: an unproven yet com-
mon practice. Ann Intern Med 2008; 149:259–63. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18711156 
10  Robey RB, Lash JP, Arruda JA. Does furosemide have a role in the management of hypercalcemia? Ann 
Intern Med 2009; 150:146–7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19153420
11  Fitzpatrick LA. The hypocalcemic states. In: Favus M (ed) Disorders of bone and mineral metabolism. 
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002:568–88
12  Kramer HJ, Choi HK, Atkinson K, et al. The association between gout and nephrolithiasis in men: The 
Health  Professionals’  Follow-Up  Study.  Kidney  Int  2003;  64:1022–6.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/12911552
13  Kanis JA, Johnell O, Oden A, et al. FRAX and the assessment of fracture probability in men and women 
from the UK. Osteoporos Int 2008; 19:385–97. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2267485/
14  NICE.  Alendronate,  etidronate,  risedronate,  raloxifene  and  strontium  ranelate  for  the  primary 
prevention of osteoporotic fragility fractures in postmenopausal women [TA160]. 2008, updated 2011. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/ta160
15  Howe TE, Shea B, Dawson LJ, et al. Exercise for preventing and treating osteoporosis in postmenopausal 
women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 7:CD000333. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.
CD000333.pub2/abstract
16  Gillespie WJ. Hip protectors for preventing hip fractures in older people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2010; 10:CD001255. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001255.pub4/abstract
17  Eberling P. Osteoporosis in men. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:1474–82. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMcp0707217
18  Vollbrecht J, Rao DS. Tumor-induced osteomalacia. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:1282. http://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMicm066066#t=article
19  Wermers RA, Tiegs RD, Atkinson EJ, et al. Morbidity and mortality associated with Paget’s disease of 
bone: a population study. J Bone Miner Res 2008; 23:819–25. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2515478/
20  NICE. Chronic  kidney  disease:  Early  identiﬁ cation  and  management  of  chronic  kidney  disease  in 
adults in primary and secondary care [CG73]. 2008. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg73
21  Anon.  Randomised  trial  of  cholesterol  lowering  in  4444  patients  with  coronary  heart  disease:  the 
Scandinavian  Simvastatin  Survival  Study  (4S).  Lancet  1994;  344:1383–9.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7968073
22  Shepherd J, Cobbe SM, Ford I, et al. Prevention of coronary heart disease with pravastatin in men with 
hypercholesterolemia. West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995; 333:1301–8. 
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199511163332001#t=article
23  Sacks FM, Pfeff er MA, Moye LA, et al. The eff ect of pravastatin on coronary events after myocardial 
infarction in patients with average cholesterol levels. Cholesterol and Recurrent Events Trial investiga-
tors. N Engl J Med 1996; 335:1001–9. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199610033351401#t=article
24  Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol lower-
ing with simvastatin in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet  2002; 
360:7–22. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(02)09327-3/abstract
25  Libby P. Inﬂ ammation in atherosclerosis. Nature 2002; 420:868–74. http://www.nature.com/nature/jour-
nal/v420/n6917/full/nature01323.html
26  Versmissen  J,  Oosterveer  DM,  Yazdanpanah  M,  et  al.  Effi  cacy  of  statins  in  familial  hypercholester-
olaemia:  a  long  term  cohort  study.  BMJ  2008;  337:a2423  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2583391/
27  NICE. Cardiovascular disease: Risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modiﬁ cation [CG181]. 
2014, updated 2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG181
28  McKenney JM, Davidson MH, Jacobson TA, et al. Final conclusions and recommendations of the Na-
tional Lipid Association Statin Safety Assessment Task Force. Am J Cardiol 2006; 8A:89C–94C. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16581336
29  Robinson JG, Farnier M, Krempf M, et al. Effi  cacy and safety of alirocumab in reducing lipids and cardio-
vascular events. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(16):1489–99. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1501031

Chapter 15: Eponymous syndromes
1  Todd J. The syndrome of Alice in Wonderland. Can Med Assoc J 1955; 73(9):701–4. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1826192/
2  Cau C. The Alice in Wonderland syndrome. Minerva Med 1999; 90(10):397–401. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/10767914
3  Fritschy D, Fasel J, Imbert JC, et al. The popliteal cyst. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2006; 
14(7):623–8. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16362357
4  Scheinfeld NS. Erythema induratum (nodular vasculitis). Medscape. 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.
com/article/1083213-overview
5  Hakim A, Gavin Clunie G, Haq I. Behçet’s disease. In: Oxford Handbook of Clinical Rheumatology (3rd 
edn). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011:490–1.
6  Mariotti AJ, Agrawal R, Hotaling AJ. The role of tonsillectomy in pediatric IgA nephropathy. Arch Otolar-
yngol Head Neck Surg 2009; 135(1):85–7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19153312
7  Fourcade G, Bengler C, Campello CH, et al. [Bickerstaff ’s syndrome presenting with coma, tetraplegia and 
blindness]. Rev Neurol (Paris) 2007; 163(2):231–4. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17351542
8  Fitzgerald RC, di Pietro M, Ragunath K, et al. British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines on the diag-
nosis and management of Barrett’s oesophagus. Gut 2014; 63(1):7–42. http://gut.bmj.com/content/63/1/7.long
9  Tham  T.  Guidelines  on  the  diagnosis  and  management  of  Barrett’s  oesophagus  -  an  update  2015. 
[Online  only]  http://www.bsg.org.uk/clinical-guidelines/oesophageal/guidelines-on-the-diagnosis-and-
management-of-barrett-s-oesophagus.html

_OHCM_10e.indb   864

_OHCM_10e.indb   864

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

865

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

10  Ambardekar AV, Krantz MJ. The Brugada syndrome: the perfect storm of genetics and environment? 
Int J Cardiol 2009; 141(1):108–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19157599
11  Hedley  PL,  Jørgensen  P,  Schlamowitz  S,  et  al.  The  genetic  basis  of  Brugada  syndrome:  a  mutation 
update. Hum Mutat 2009; 30(9):1256–66. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19606473
12  Moon SJ, Lee JK, Kim TW, et al. Idiopathic transverse myelitis presenting as the Brown-Séquard syn-
drome. Spinal Cord 2008; 47(2):176–8. http://www.nature.com/sc/journal/v47/n2/full/sc200823a.html
13  Menon KV, Shah V, Kamath PS. The Budd-Chiari syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:578–85. http://www.
nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra020282 
14  Vaglio A, Moosig F, Zwerina J. Churg-Strauss syndrome: update on pathophysiology and treatment. 
Curr Opin Rheumatol 2012; 24(1):24–30. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22089097
15  Liberski PP, Sikorska B, Hauw JJ, et al. Tubulovesicular structures are a consistent (and unexplained) 
ﬁ nding in the brains of humans with prion diseases. Virus Res 2008; 132(1–2):226–8. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/18164506
16  CJD surveillance unit in Edinburgh. 2009. http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/documents/ﬁ gs.pdf
17  Dorsey K, Zou S, Schonberger LB, et al. Lack of evidence of transfusion transmission of Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease in a US surveillance study. Transfusion  2009; 49(5):977–84. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19170987
18  Iwasaki Y, Mimuro M, Yoshida M, et al. Clinical diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: accuracy based 
on analysis of autopsy-conﬁ rmed cases. J Neurol Sci 2008; 277(1–2):119–23. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19056094
19  Armstrong RA. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and vision. Clin Exp Optom 2006; 89(1):3–9. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16430434
20  Zanusso G, Ferrari S, Cardone F, et al. Detection of pathologic prion protein in the olfactory epithelium in 
sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease. N Engl J Med 2003; 348:711–19. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMoa022043#t=article
21  Tatersall R, Turner B. Brown-Séquard and his syndrome. Lancet 2000; 356:61–3. http://www.thelancet.
com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(00)02441-7/abstract 
22  Goodall  CA,  Head  MW,  Everington  D,  et  al.  Raised  CSF  phospho-tau  concentrations  in  variant 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: diagnostic and pathological implications. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2006; 
77(1):89–91. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2117383/
23  Karazindiyanoglu S, Cayan S. The eff ect of testosterone therapy on lower urinary tract symptoms/blad-
der and sexual functions in men with symptomatic late-onset hypogonadism. Aging Male 2008; 11(3):146–9. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18821291
24  Studd J. A comparison of 19th century and current attitudes to female sexuality. Gynecol Endocrinol 
2007; 23(12):673–81. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18075842
25  Cussons AJ, Bhagat CI, Fletcher SJ, et al. Brown-Séquard revisited: a lesson from history on the pla-
cebo eff ect of androgen treatment. Med J Aust 2002; 177(11–12):678–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/12463999
26  Bliss M. Harvey Cushing: A life in surgery. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005
27  Liberski PP, Brown P. Kuru: its ramiﬁ cations after ﬁ fty years. Exp Gerontol 2009; 44(1–2):63–9. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18606515
28  Miller  N.  The  misfolding  diseases  unfold.  Beremans  Limited.  2004  http://www.beremans.com/pdf/
The_misfolding_diseases_unfold.pdf
29  Lepur D, Peterkovic´ V, Kalabric´-Lepur N. Neuromyelitis optica with CSF examination mimicking bacte-
rial meningomyelitis. Neurol Sci 2009; 30(1):51–4. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19145403
30  Kim SH, Kim W, Li XF, et al. Repeated treatment with rituximab based on the assessment of peripheral 
circulating memory B cells in patients with relapsing neuromyelitis optica over 2 years. Arch Neurol 2011; 
68(11):1412–20. http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaneurology/fullarticle/1107915
31  Trauner M, Meier PJ, Boyer JL. Molecular pathogenesis of cholestasis. N Engl J Med 1998; 339:1217–27. 
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199810223391707
32  Badalamente MA, Hurst LC. Effi  cacy and safety of injectable mixed collagenase subtypes in the treat-
ment of Dupuytren’s contracture. J Hand Surg Am 2007; 32(6):767–74. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/17606053
33  Wetter TC. Restless legs syndrome: a review for the renal care professionals. EDTNA ERCA J 2001; 
27(1):42–6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12603074
34  Schaefer RM, Tylki-Szymac´ska A, Hilz MJ. Enzyme replacement therapy for Fabry disease: a systematic 
review of available evidence. Drugs 2009; 69(16):2179–205. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19852524
35  Narváez J, Domingo-Domenech E, Gómez-Vaquero C, et al. Biological agents in the management of 
Felty’s syndrome: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2012; 41(5):658–68. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/22119104
36  Weinshenker BG. Neuromyelitis optica: what it is and what it might be. Lancet 2003; 361(9361):889–90. 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)12784-5/abstract
37  Losacco T, Punzo C, Santacroce L. [Gardner syndrome: clinical and epidemiologic up to date]. Clin Ter 
2005; 156(6):267–71. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16463563
38  Okai T, Yamaguchi Y, Sakai J, et al. Case report: complete regression of colonic adenomas after treat-
ment with sulindac in Gardner’s syndrome: a 4-year follow-up. J Gastroenterol 2001; 36:778–82. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11757751 
39  Mignot  E.  Narcolepsy  and  the  HLA  system.  N  Engl  J  Med  2001;  344:692.  http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJM200103013440918#t=article
40  Freeman RD, Zinner SH, Müller-Vahl KR, et al. Coprophenomena in Tourette syndrome. Dev Med Child 
Neurol 2009; 51(3):218–27. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19183216
41  Turtle L, Robertson MM. Tics, twitches, tales: the experiences of Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome. Am J 
Orthopsychiatry 2008; 78(4):449–55. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19123766
42  Himle MB, Woods DW, Piacentini JC, et al. Brief review of habit reversal training for Tourette syndrome. 
J Child Neurol 2006; 21(8):719–25. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16970874
43  Hughes RA, Swan AV, Raphaël JC, et al. Immunotherapy for Guillain-Barré syndrome: a systematic 
review. Brain 2007; 130(Pt 9):2245–57. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17337484
44  Nagayama  H,  Katayama  Y.  Nippon  Rinsho.  [Apheresis  therapy  in  Guillain-Barré  syndrome].  Nihon 
Rinsho 2008; 66(6):1195–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18540370

_OHCM_10e.indb   865

_OHCM_10e.indb   865

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

866

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

45  McCusker EJ, Richards F, Sillence D, et al. Huntington’s disease: neurological assessment of potential 
gene carriers presenting for predictive DNA testing. Clin Neurosci 2000; 7(1):38–41. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/10847649
46  Tranebjaerg L, Samson RA, Green GE. Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome. GeneReviews® 2002 July 29 
[updated November 2014]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1405/
47  Bersudsky M, Rosenberg P, Rudensky B, et al. Lipopolysaccharides of a Campylobacter coli isolate from 
a patient with Guillain-Barré syndrome display ganglioside mimicry. Neuromuscul Disord 2000; 10:182–6. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10734265
48  Janniger  CK.  Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber  syndrome.  Medscape.  2016.  http://reference.medscape.com/
article/1084257-overview
49  Vassalo R, Ryu JH, Colby TV, et al. Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis. N Engl J Med 2000 342:1969–
78. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200006293422607 
50  Beyerbach  DM.  Lown-Ganong-Levine  syndrome.  Medscape.  2015.  http://emedicine.medscape.com/
article/160097-overview
51  Quinlivan R, Vissing J, Hilton-Jones D, et al. Physical training for McArdle disease. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2011; 12:CD007931. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD007931.pub2/abstract
52  Quinlivan R, Martinuzzi A, Schoser B. Pharmacological and nutritional treatment for McArdle disease 
(glycogen storage disease type V). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 12:CD003458. http://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD003458.pub4/abstract 
53  Ault J. Marchiafava-Bignami disease. Medscape. 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1146086-
overview
54  Parker C. Eculizumab for paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Lancet 2009; 373(9665):759–67. http://
www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(09)60001-5/abstract 
55  Lambrecht NW. Ménétrier’s disease of the stomach: a clinical challenge. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2011; 
13(6):513–17. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21931998
56  Yamamoto M, Harada S, Ohara M, et al. Clinical and pathological diff erences between Mikulicz’s disease 
and Sjögren’s syndrome. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2005; 44(2):227–34. http://rheumatology.oxfordjournals.
org/content/44/2/227.long 
57  Asher  RAJ.  Munchausen’s  syndrome.  Lancet  1951;  257:339–41.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub-
med/14805062
58  Ponec RJ, Saunders MD, Kimmey MB. Neostigmine for the treatment of acute colonic pseudo-obstruc-
tion. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:137–41. http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199907153410301#t=article
59  Hatzimouratidis  K,  Eardley  I,  Giuliano  F,  et  al.  EAU  guidelines  on  penile  curvature.  Eur  Urol  2012; 
62(3):543–52. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22658761
60  Kim ED. Local therapies to heal the penis: fact or ﬁ ction? J Androl 2008; 30(4):384–90. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19023141
61  Aomar  Millán  IF,  Candel  Erenas  JM,  et  al.  [Up-date  of  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  vasospastic 
angina]. Rev Clin Esp 2008; 208(2):94–6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18261397
62  Keller KB, Lemberg L. Prinzmetal’s angina. Am J Crit Care 2004; 13(4):350–4. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/15293589
63  Wanders RJA, Waterham HR, Leroy BP. Refsum disease. GeneReviews® 2006 March 20 [updated June 
11 2015]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1353/
64  Fox RI. Sjögren’s syndrome. Lancet 2005; 366:321–31. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16039337
65  Worswick S, Cotliar J. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a review of treatment 
options. Dermatol Ther 2011; 24(2):207–18. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21410610
66  Jayne  DRW.  Conventional  treatment  and  outcome  of  Wegener’s  granulomatosis  and  microscopic 
polyangiitis.  CCJM  2002;  69(Suppl  2):SII110–5.  http://www.ccjm.org/supplements/single-view/conven-
tional-treatment-and-outcome-of-wegener-s-granulomatosis-and-microscopic-polyangiitis/0d8061df0951
aa4829194e88a0a1ba6b.html 
67  Kuo SH, Debnam JM, Fuller GN, et al. Wernicke’s encephalopathy: an underrecognized and reversible 
cause of confusional state in cancer patients. J Oncology 2009; 76(1):10–8. https://www.karger.com/Article/
Abstract/174951
68  Marth T, Raoult D. Whipple’s disease. Lancet 2003; 361(9353):239–46. http://www.thelancet.com/jour-
nals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)12274-X/abstract
69  Auernhammer CJ, Göke B. Medical treatment of gastrinomas. Wien  Klin  Wochenschr 2007; 119(19–
20):609–15. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17985097
70  Anon. Listening to patients with rare diseases. Lancet 2009; 373:868. http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/
journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(09)60519-5.pdf

Chapter 16: Radiology
No references for this chapter
Chapter 17: Reference intervals
No references for this chapter
Chapter 18: Practical procedures
1  Johnston AJ, Streater CT, Noorani R, et al. The eff ect of peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) 
valve technology on catheter occlusion rates - The ‘ELeCTRiC study. J Vasc Access 2012: 13(4):421–5. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22505280

_OHCM_10e.indb   866

_OHCM_10e.indb   866

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

867

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

Chapter 19: Emergencies
1  Hawkes C. Smart handles and red ﬂ ags in neurological diagnosis. Hosp Med 2002; 63:732–42. https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12512200
2  NICE. Sepsis: Recognition, diagnosis and early management [NG51]. 2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng51
3  Task Force on the management of ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial infarction in patients 
presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J 2012; 33(20):2569–619. http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.
org/content/33/20/2569.long
4  Roffi   M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes 
in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur  Heart  J  2016; 37(3):267–315. http://
eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/3/267.long
5  NICE. Ticagrelor for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes [TA236]. 2011. https://www.nice.org.
uk/guidance/ta236
6  Resuscitation Council (UK). Advanced life support (7th edn). London: Resuscitation Council (UK), 2016
7  Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. British guideline on the management of asthma (SIGN 
141).  2014.  https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/document-library/clinical-information/asthma/btssign-asth-
ma-guideline-2014/
8  NICE.  Management  of  exacerbations  of  COPD.  In:  Chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  in  over 
16s:  Diagnosis  and  management  [CG101].  2010.  https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101/chapter/1-
guidance#management-of-exacerbations-of-copd
9  MacDuff   A,  Arnold  A,  Harvey  J,  et  al.  Management  of  spontaneous  pneumothorax:  British  Thoracic 
Society pleural disease guideline 2010. Thorax 2010; 65(Suppl 2):ii18–31. http://thorax.bmj.com/content/65/
Suppl_2/ii18.long
10  Lim WS, Baudouin SV, George RC, et al. BTS guidelines for the management of community acquired 
pneumonia  in  adults:  update  2009.  Thorax  2009;  64(Suppl  3):iii1–55.  http://thorax.bmj.com/content/64/
Suppl_3/iii1.long
11  NICE. Recommendations. In: Venous thromboembolic diseases: Diagnosis, management and throm-
bophilia testing [CG141]. 2012. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg144/chapter/recommendations
12  NICE. Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s: Management [CG141]. 2012. https://www.
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg141
13  McGill F, Heyderman R, Michael B, et al. The UK Joint Specialist Societies guideline on the diagnosis 
and management of acute meningitis and meningococcal sepsis in immunocompetent adults. J Infect 2016; 
72:405–38. http://www.journaloﬁ nfection.com/article/S0163-4453(16)00024-4/abstract
14  NICE. Epilepsies: Diagnosis and management [CG137]. 2012, updated 2016. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg137
15  NICE. Head injury: Assessment and early management [CG176]. 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/guid-
ance/cg176
16  Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient Care Group. The management of diabetic ketoacidosis in 
adults. Second edition. Update: September 2013. https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Documents/About%20Us/
What%20we%20say/Management-of-DKA-241013.pdf
17  Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient Care Group. The management of the hyperosmolar hyper-
glycaemic state (HHS) in adults with diabetes. August 2012. https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Documents/
Position%20statements/JBDS-IP-HHS-Adults.pdf

_OHCM_10e.indb   867

_OHCM_10e.indb   867

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

868

Index 

For drugs, consult the disease you want to treat, not the drug.

Abbreviations: F indexes a notable ﬁ gure or image; dis = disease; syn = syndrome.

A

AA amyloid 370
Abbreviated Mental Test 

Score 64

ABCD2 score 477
ABCDE preliminary assessment 

779
Abdomen 

acute 606 
areas 565
auscultation 61, 63
burst 580
distension 57, 604
examination 40, 60–1, 62–3
hernias 612, 613F, 614
mass 604
pain 30, 57, 607F, 609, 732F, 

733F

palpation 61, 62 
percussion 61, 63 
X-ray 728, 729F, 744

Abdominal aortic aneurysm 

732F

ruptured 654

Abetalipoproteinaemia 691
Abscess 565

anorectal 630
appendix 608
breast 603
cerebral 824
cutaneous 594
lung 170, 171F 

Absence seizures 491, 492
Absolute risk diff erence 20
Acanthocytosis 328, 329F
Acanthosis nigricans 529, 

562, 563F
Accelerated phase 

hypertension 138

Accommodation 72
ACE inhibitors 114

drug interactions 757

Acenocoumarol 757
Acetylcholine 449

receptor antibody 553

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 

489
Achalasia 250
Acid–base balance 670–1
Acid-fast stain 382
Acidaemia 671
Acidosis 300, 670–1

lactic 834
metabolic 670
respiratory 670

Acoustic neuroma 462, 463F, 514
Acromegaly 149, 203, 238–9
Actinic keratoses 596
Actinomycosis 389
Activated 

charcoal 840
partial thromboplastin 

time 346

protein C resistance 374 

Active immunity 407
Acuity 70

driving 159

Acute 

abdomen 606

Acute… continued
appendicitis 608
asthma 810, 811F
chest syn 341
cholecystitis 634, 635
colonic pseudo-obstruction 

706

confusional state 484
coronary syn 118–21, 796–9
demyelinating encephalitis 

406

dystonia 469
exacerbations of COPD 

812, 813F

glaucoma 456, 561
heart failure 134, 136
inﬂ ammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (GBS) 447, 
702, 703

intermittent porphyria 

692, 693

kidney injury 298–301
labyrinthitis 462
limb ischaemia 657
lung injury 186, 187F
lymphoblastic leukaemia 

354, 355F

mesenteric ischaemia 620
myeloid leukaemia 356–7
myocarditis 152
pancreatitis 636–7, 667
pericarditis 154, 155F
phase response 686
porphyrias 692
prostatitis 645
pyelonephritis 296
respiratory distress syn 

186, 187F

tubulointerstitial nephritis 

318 
Adder bites 843
Addisonian crisis 836 
Addison’s dis 203, 226–7, 664
Adenocarcinoma, colon 249F
Adenoma 

adrenal 224
bronchial 174
liver 286
pleomorphic 599
toxic 218

Adenosine, drug interactions 

757

Adenovirus 428
Adhesions/adhesiolysis 581
Adjuvant analgesia 574
Admirand’s triangle 634
ADP receptor antagonists 114
Adrenal 

adenoma 224
carcinoma 224
cortex 224
insuffi  ciency 226–7
nodular hyperplasia 224
vein sampling 229

Adrenaline 449
Adult congenital heart dis 

156–7

Advanced life support 761, 894
Aerobes 382
Aff erent loop syn 622 

African 

eye worm 439
trypanosomiasis 423

Ageing 16
Agitation 537
Agranulocytosis 364
AIDS 517, 560
Air travel, DVT 579
Airway 772
Akinetic seizures 491, 492
AL amyloid 370
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 

291, 688
Albumin 686
Albumin:creatinine ratio 

294, 686
Albuminuria 686
Alcohol 

alcoholism 280
biochemistry 664
CNS 705
hepatitis 280, 281
liver dis 280, 291
screening 281
withdrawal 280

Aldosterone 668
Alfentanil 533
Alice in Wonderland syn 694
Alkaline phosphatase 291, 688
Alkalosis 670–1
Allergic bronchopulmonary 

aspergillosis 177

Allergies 8, 26
Allocation of resources 3
Allodynia 559
 amylase 688
1-antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 290
Alpha-fetoprotein 531
-gliadin antibody 553
 thalassaemia 342, 343F
Alport syn 320
Alveolar opaciﬁ cation 724
Alzheimer’s dis 488, 489
Amanita phalloides 273F
Amaurosis fugax 476, 560
American Society of 

Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
classiﬁ cation 567
American trypanosomiasis 

423

Amfebutamone 93
Amikacin 387

therapeutic range 756

Amino acids 449

Aminoglycosides 387
drug interactions 757
nephrotoxicity 319

Aminophylline 810
Aminotransferases 

ALT 291, 688
AST 291, 688

Amiodarone 115, 220
Amoebiasis 432–3
Amoxicillin 386

+clavulanic acid 386

Ampicillin 386
Amputation 656
Amyloidosis 149, 315, 370, 371F
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 

506, 507

_OHCM_10e.indb   868

_OHCM_10e.indb   868

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Amyotrophy 212
Anacrotic pulse 42
Anaemia 34, 324 
aplastic 364 
blood transfusion 324
chronic dis (secondary) 326
Fanconi 698
haemolytic 324, 336–9
iron-deﬁ ciency 326 
macrocytic 324, 332, 333F
megaloblastic 332, 333F 
microangiopathic 338, 339F
microcytic 324 
normocytic 324 
pernicious 334 
sickle cell 340–1
sideroblastic 326, 327F

Anaerobes 382
Anaesthesia 572–3
Anal 

canal 631F
cancer 631
examination 63
ulcer 630

Analgesia/analgesics
nephropathy 311
pain relief 532, 574, 575F
patient-controlled 341
rebound headache 456
Anaphylactic shock 794, 795F
ANCA-associated vasculitis 

314, 556
Aneurysm 

arterial 654 
Berry 478 
false 654 
leaking abdominal aortic 

732F

left ventricular 122
ruptured abdominal aortic 

654

subclavian artery 598
unruptured intracranial 479

Angina pectoris 116 
decubitus 116 
driving 158
stable 116 
unstable (crescendo) 116, 118
variant (Prinzmetal’s) 116, 

117, 708, 709
Angiodysplasia 249F
Angiography

catheter 740, 746, 747
CT 657F, 746, 747F
MR 744, 745F, 746

Angioplasty 656
driving 158

Angiotensin I/II 668
Angiotensinogen 668
Angular stomatitis (cheilosis) 

246, 327F
Anion gap 670
Anisocoria 72
Anisocytosis 327F, 328
Ankle 

–brachial pressure index 

656

movements 69
reﬂ exes 68

Ankylosing spondylitis 149, 

550, 551F

Ann Arbor system 360
Anocutaneous reﬂ ex 63
Anogenital warts 406

Anorectal abscess 630
Anterior 

cerebral artery 450
uveitis 561

Anterolateral system 516
Anthrax 424
Anti-anginals 116
Anti-aquaporin 4 antibody 

553
Antibiotics 

infective endocarditis 151
mechanisms of action 

383, 385

neutropenia 352
pneumonia 167
prescribing guide 384
prophylactic in surgery 570
resistance 383 
stewardship 384 
summary tables 386–7
TB 160F, 394

Antibodies 686; see also 
Autoantibodies

Anticentromere antibody 553
Anticholinergics 495
Anticoagulants 114, 350–1 

antidotes 350
atrial ﬁ brillation 131
poisoning 842
surgery 590

Anticyclic citrullinated peptide 

antibody 553
Antidiabetics 208

drug interactions 757
Anti-double stranded DNA 

antibody 553

Antidromic conduction 127
Anti-emetics 251
Anti-endomysial antibody 553
Antiepileptic drugs 492, 493
Anti-extractable nuclear 
antigen antibody 553

Anti-glomerular basement 
membrane dis 311

Antihelminths 433
Antihistamines, drug 
interactions 757
Antihistone antibody 553
Anti-Jo-1 553
Anti-La 553
Anti-Mi-2 553
Antimicrobial stewardship 384
Antimitochondrial antibody 

553

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic 

antibody 553

Antinuclear antibody 553
Anti-parkinson drugs 495
Antiphospholipid 
antibody 553
syn 374, 554

Antiplatelets 114, 473, 590
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) 

402–3

drug interactions 757

Anti-RNP 553
Anti-Ro 553
Anti-Scl70 553
Anti-Sm 553
Anti-smooth muscle antibody 

553

Antithrombin deﬁ ciency 374
Anti-tissue transglutaminase 

antibody 553

Anti-voltage-gated 

Ca2+-channel antibody 553
K+-channel antibody 553

869

Anuria 81, 293
Anus 

cancer 631
examination 63
ulcer 630
Anxiety 460
Aorta

abdominal aneurysm 654, 

732F

coarctation 156
palpation 61, 62
thoracic dissection 655

Aortic 

arch syn 712
bicuspid valve 156
calciﬁ cation 147F
coarctation 156
regurgitation 47, 146
root surgery 148
sclerosis 146
stenosis 146
Apex beat 39, 40
Aphasia 86, 87
Aphthous ulcer 246, 247F
Aplastic anaemia 364
ApoCII deﬁ ciency 691
Apology 5
Apomorphine 495
Appendicectomy 609F
Appendicitis 608
Appendix 

abscess 608
mass 608
Apraxic gait 467
Arbovirus 420
ARDS 186, 187F
Argentinian HF 426
Argyll Robertson pupil 72
Aristolochic acid nephropathy 

319
Aristotle 445
Arithmetic mean 751
Arm 50, 60, 66–7

GALS screen 540

Arnold–Chiari malformation 

694

Arrhythmias 124–31 
congenital 133
driving 158
Arrhythmogenic 

right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy 133

Art and medicine
Gillray 549F
Michelangelo 233F 
Picasso 5
Rubens 237F
van Gogh 459

Arterial blood gases 

dangerous results 665
interpretation 189
reference intervals 753
taking samples 162, 771
when to consider 188

Arteries 

aneurysms 654
cerebral 450
leg 656
peripheral dis 656–7
surgery 580

_OHCM_10e.indb   869

_OHCM_10e.indb   869

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

870

Arteritis

giant cell 456, 556
Takayasu’s 556, 712

Arthritis

Autoantibodies 553

tests 283
thyroid 216
Autoimmune dis 

osteoarthritis 75F, 541F, 544 
patterns of presentation 539
psoriatic 551
reactive 551
rheumatic fever 142
rheumatoid 149, 541F, 546–7
septic 544

ASA classiﬁ cation 567
Asbestosis 201
Ascaris lumbricoides 433
Ascites 277F, 604
draining 764
percussion 61

Asclepius xiiF
Aspartate aminotransferase 

(AST) 291, 688

Aspergillosis 177
Aspergillus niger 246
Aspiration 
joint 541
pleural eff usion 765
pneumonia 166, 167
pneumothorax 767

Aspirin 114, 574

poisoning 844
Assisted suicide 507
Asterixis 468
Asthma 177, 178–83, 810, 811F
Astrovirus 428
Ataxia 

Friedreich’s 149, 698, 700
gait 467

Atherosclerotic renovascular 

dis 315
Athetosis 87, 468
Atonic seizures 491, 492
Atrial ﬁ brillation 122, 130, 806 

anticoagulation 131 
ECG 98, 131F
INR 351
pneumonia 170
pre-excited 131
stroke 473

Atrial ﬂ utter 122, 127, 131, 806
Atrial natriuretic peptide 137
Atrial septal defect 156
Atrial tachyarrhythmia 806
Atrial tachycardia 806
Atrioventricular 

nodal re-entry tachycardia 

127
node 115
re-entry tachycardia 127

Atrophie blanche 658
Atrophy

multiple system 494
optic 71, 560
peroneal muscular 696
progressive muscular 506

Attributable risk 20
Auer rods 357F
Auscultation 

abdomen 61, 63
chest 51, 52 
heart 40 
peripheral vascular system 

78, 79

praecordium 39 
thyroid 84, 85

Austin Flint murmur 46, 146

connective tissue dis 552
haemolytic anaemia 338, 339F
hepatitis 284, 291
polyendocrine syn 223
Autologous transfusion 348
Automatic external 

deﬁ brillators 770

Autonomic neuropathy 212, 505
Autonomy 14
Autosomal dominant 

polycystic kidney dis 320
Autosomal recessive polycystic 

kidney dis 320

AV nipping 560F
Avian inﬂ uenza 169
AVPU scale 788
Axilla palpation 83
Azathioprine 265, 376

drug interactions 757

Azithromycin 387
Aztreonam 385

B

Babinski’s sign 68
Bacilli 382 

Gram-negative 391
Gram-positive 389

Bacillus 

anthracis 424
cereus 428
Back pain 542
Bacteraemia 382
Bacteria 382

gastroenteritis 428
Gram-negative 390–1
Gram-positive 388–9
infection, overview 382
overgrowth 267
vaginosis 413
Bacteriocidal 382
Bacteriostatic 382
Bacteriuria 296
Bad news 518F, 519
Bagassosis 198
Baker’s cyst 694
Balanitis 645
Balkan endemic nephropathy 

319

Bannister, R. 444F
Bariatric surgery 626, 627F
Barium contrast 742, 743F, 748
Barrel chest 55
Barrett’s oesophagus 254, 695
Barthel’s index 475
Bartonella 424
Bart’s hydrops 342
Bartter’s syn 228, 317
Basal cell carcinoma 596, 597F
Basophilia 330
Basophilic stippling 328, 329F
Basophils 330, 331F
Bat’s wing 723F
Bazin’s dis 694
Beau’s lines 76, 525
Becker’s muscular dystrophy 

510, 511
Beck’s triad 154
Bedside manner 6–7
Beefy tongue 335F
Beethoven, L. Van 465

Behçet’s dis 149, 550, 556, 

560, 694
Bell’s palsy 500
Bence-Jones proteins 686
Beneﬁ cence 14
Benign 

essential myoclonus 468
essential tremor 65
oesophageal stricture 250
positional vertigo 462
prostatic hyperplasia 642
Benzodiazepine poisoning 842
Benzylpenicillin 386
Berger’s dis 694
Beriberi 268
Berry aneurysm rupture 478
-blockers 114

drug interactions 757
poisoning 842

-lactams 385
 thalassaemia 149, 342, 343F
Bevan, A. 2, 3
Bickerstaff ’s brainstem 
encephalitis 694
Bicuspid aortic valve 156
Bifascicular block 100 
Bigeminy 128, 129F
Bilateral hilar 

lymphadenopathy 197

Bile duct cancer 619 
Bilharzia 434
Biliary 

colic 634, 635
plain X-ray 728
surgery 580
tree cancer 286

Bilirubin 273
Billings, J. 244
Billroth 622, 623F
Biochemistry 664

reference intervals 752–3

Biological agents 265, 547
Biopsy 

bone marrow 364
duodenal 248
liver 248
lung 164
renal 310
sentinel node 603
Bird-fancier’s lung 198
Bisferiens pulse 42
Bite-cell 339F
Bitôt’s spots 268
Black sickness 423
Blackouts 36, 460–1
Bladder 

catheterization 297, 762–3
neck obstruction 649
obstructive/irritative 

symptoms 81 

overactive 648
overdistension 81
percussion 61 
tumours 646–7
Blast injuries 851
Blastomycosis 408
Blasts 328
Bleeding 

approach to 346 
disorders 344
history 347
post-operative 577
rectal 629
upper GI 57, 256–7, 820, 821F

_OHCM_10e.indb   870

_OHCM_10e.indb   870

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

871

Blepharospasm 469
Blindness 71
Blister-cells 339F
Blood ﬁ lm 323F, 328, 329F
Blood-letting 323
Blood loss 

estimation 607
ﬂ uids 667

Blood pressure 38, 40 

diabetes 211
sphygmomanometer 139
unusual measurement 41

Blood products 348–9
Blood transfusion 348–9 

anaemia 324
Bloody tap 768
Blue bloaters 184
Blue lanulae 62
BODE index 184
BODEX 10
Body 

habitus 32
mass index 245
temperature 32

Boil 594
Bolivian HF 426
Bone 

biomarkers 664
DEXA 683
metabolic dis 682–5 
pain/tenderness 369
scintigraphy 738

Bone marrow 
biopsy 364
failure 364 
transplant 356
Boone, N. 307, 309F
Bordatella pertussis 391
Bornholm dis 82
Borrelia 422, 423
Boston Tea Party 538F
Botulism 436
Bouchard’s nodes 77, 544
Bounding pulse 42
Bouveret’s syn 634
Bowel 

gas patterns 728, 729F
obstruction 610, 611F
radiological assessment 728
sounds 61
Bowen’s dis 596
Brachial 

plexus 502
pulse 38

Brachytherapy 527
Bradford Hill criteria 18
Bradyarrhythmias 122
Bradycardia 124, 808, 809F

sinus 98, 122
Bradykinesia 494
Brain 

blood supply 450, 451F
metastases 529
natriuretic peptide 137

Brainstem 
death 12
infarcts 470
lesions 447

Branchial cyst 598
Brazilian HF 426
BRCA1/2 521
Breast 

abscess 603
benign dis 603 

Breast… continued

cancer 521, 522, 602–3 
cyst 603 
examination 83
feeding 17
history 82 
lump 82, 603F 
nipple discharge 82 
Paget’s dis 708, 709F
pain 82 
triple assessment of lumps 

603F
Breathing 

bronchial 52
Cheyne–Stokes 53
patterns 53
sounds 52
Breathlessness 

emergencies 782
palliative care 534

Brisbane, S. 427
Broad complex tachycardia 
128, 129F, 804, 805F

Broad St pump 431
Broca’s dysphasia 86
Broken heart syn 145
Bronchial 

adenoma 174
breathing 52
cancer 174–6, 522
Bronchiectasis 172
Bronchitis, chronic 184
Bronchoalveolar lavage 164
Bronchoscopy 164
Brown–Séquard syn 696, 697
Brucellosis 424
Brugada syn 133, 695
Brugia 

malaya 421
timori 421

Bruits 61
Bubonic plague 425
Budd–Chiari syn 696
Buerger’s 
angle 78
dis 696, 697
sign 78
test 79
Buffl  er, P. 18
Bulbar palsy 86, 506, 507
Bundle branch block 100, 101F, 

102F, 122, 127

Bupropion 93
Burkitt’s lymphoma 362, 363F
Burnout 11
Burns 846–7
Burr cells 328, 329F
Burst abdomen 580

C

13C breath test 253
C-reactive protein 686, 687
C3 glomerulonephritis 313
Cabot ring 328, 329F
Cachexia 35
Café-au-lait spots 514, 515
Calabar swellings 439
Calciﬁ cation
aortic 147F
metastatic (ectopic) 676

Calcitonin 531, 676
Calcitriol 676
Calcium 676

antagonists 114

Calcium… continued
deﬁ ciency 268
oxalate crystals 295
pyrophosphate deposition 

548

stones 638, 639

Campylobacter 428, 429, 431
Canal

anal 631F
femoral 613F
Guyon’s 503
inguinal 615

Cancer/carcinoma 

adrenal 224
anal 631
antigen (CA) 531
basal cell 596, 597F
bile duct 619 
biliary tree 286
bladder 646–7
breast 521, 522, 602–3
bronchial 174–6, 522
cervical 406
chemotherapy 524 
clinical trials 525 
CNS 522 
colorectal 521, 616–17 
diagnosis 519, 522 
emergencies 528–9 
fertility 525 
gallbladder 619 
genetics 520–1 
gynaecological 522 
hereditary 521 
imaging 523 
interventional oncology 527
liver 286–7
lower GI 522 
lung 174–6, 522 
multidisciplinary team 523
oesophageal 250, 618 
ovarian 521 
palliative care 532–7
pancreas 270
penile 644
prostate 521, 644, 645 
radiotherapy 526–7 
renal cell 644 
screening 530 
secondary skin 596
skin 596, 597
skin manifestations 562
squamous cell 596, 597F
staging 523 
stomach 619, 622
surgery 525 
testes 650, 651F
therapeutic targeting 520F
thyroid 600 
tongue 246
transitional cell 644, 646
tumour markers 530, 531 
upper GI 522
urology 522, 644 
viruses 405

Candida albicans 408F, 409F
Candidiasis 246, 247F, 400, 408, 

409F, 413

Candour 5
Cannula

central venous 774
IV 760–1
nasal 189
PICC 774

_OHCM_10e.indb   871

_OHCM_10e.indb   871

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

872

Capacity 15, 568
Capillary reﬁ ll 79
Caplan’s syn 201, 696
Capsulate bacteria 382
Capture beat 129F
Caput medusae 62, 276
Carbamazepine 

drug interactions 757
therapeutic range 756

Carbapenems 385, 386
Carbon monoxide poisoning 

842

Carbon tetrachloride poisoning 

843
Carbuncle 594
Carcinoembryonic antigen 

531
Carcinoid 
crisis 271
syn 149, 271
tumours 271

Carcinoma, see Cancer/

carcinoma
Card method 96 
Cardiac 

arrest 894
arrhythmias, see 
Arrhythmias

catheterization 112, 113F
CT 108, 109F, 740
cycle 45F
imaging 108, 740–1
MR 108, 109F, 740
murmurs 46–7
myxoma 152, 153F
output 790
resynchronization therapy 

132

surgery 148
tamponade 122, 154, 802
TB 393
transplantation 148
ultrasound (echo) 108, 110, 

111F, 153F, 740
Cardioembolic stroke 473
Cardiogenic shock 802, 803F
Cardiomyopathy 

arrhythmogenic right 

ventricular 133

dilated 152 
hypertrophic 109F, 110, 152 
restrictive 152
Takotsubo’s 145
Cardiorespiratory 

arrest 894
symptoms 30
Cardiovascular 
drugs 114–15
examination 38–40
history 36–7 
imaging 108, 740–1
symptoms 94

Cardioversion/deﬁ brillation 

770
Carditis 142
Care coordinator 487
Carey Coombs’ murmur 46
Carney complex 223
Carotid 

artery stenosis 472
body tumour 598
pulse 38
sinus syncope 460
Carpal tunnel syn 503

Casal’s necklace 268
Case–control studies 18
Castrato 202F
Casts 295
Cat-scratch dis 424
Catalepsy 701
Cataplexy 701
Cataract 210, 514
Catheter 

angiography 740, 746, 747F
bladder 297, 762–3
cardiac 112, 113F
femoral 775
internal jugular 775
non-draining 763
self-catheterization 763
subclavian 775
suprapubic 762
trial without 763
UTIS 297, 410

Cauda equina 466, 543
Causation 18
Cefalexin 386
Cefotaxime 386
Ceftazidime 386
Ceftriaxone 386
Cefuroxime 386
Central 

cyanosis 34
nervous system, see CNS
venous cannulation 774

Cephalosporins 385, 386
Cerebellar 

lesions 86, 87, 499
signs 87
tonsil herniation 830
Cerebellopontine angle 

lesion 499

Cerebral 

abscess 824
arteries 450
blood supply 450, 451F
infarcts 470

Cerebrohepatorenal syn 716
Cerebrospinal ﬂ uid, see CSF
Certainty 5
Cervical 

cancer 406
lymph nodes 60F, 62
rib 598
spinal injury 447, 828
spondylosis 508
vertebra 509F
CHA2DS2-VASc 131
Chagas dis 423
Chapare virus 426
Charcot, J.M. 445
Charcot joint 213F
Charcot–Marie–Tooth syn 696
Charles Bonnet syn 497
Charts 32
Chellitis 246
Chemodectoma 598
Chemotherapy 524
Chest 

auscultation 51, 52 
deformities 55
drains 766–7
examination 51 
expansion 51 
pain 36, 48, 94, 95, 784
palpation 52
percussion 51, 52 
radiology 164

Chest X-ray 722–7 

ARDS 187F
bat’s wing 723F 
bilateral hilar 

lymphadenopathy 197F 

bronchiectasis 172F
cor pulmonale 195F
device placement 726, 727F 
ﬁ brotic shadowing 199
heart 108, 109F, 722
idiopathic pulmonary 

ﬁ brosis 200F 

left ventricular assist device 

137F

left ventricular failure 135F
lower lobe collapse 723F 
lung abscess 171F 
lung nodule 175F 
lungs 724, 725F 
opaciﬁ cation 724, 725F
pneumoperitoneum 724, 

607F

pneumothorax 724, 725F, 

749F

silicosis 201F
systematic approach 722 
Cheyne–Stokes breathing 53
Chicken pox 404
Chiclero’s ulcer 440
Chikungunya 420
Children 

consent 569
ﬂ uids 667
hernias 612

Chlamydia trachomatis 412, 

413, 438
Chlamydophila 

pneumoniae 168
psittaci 168

Chloramphenicol 387
Cholangiocarcinoma 286
Cholangitis 282, 283F, 634, 635
Cholecystectomy 635
Cholecystitis 634, 635
Cholera 430, 431
Cholestasis 272, 291, 664
Chondroma 598
Choosing wisely 23
Chorea 87, 468, 469
Christmas dis 344
Chronic 

bronchitis 184
cholecystitis 634
colonic ischaemia 620
fatigue syn 558
ﬂ accid paraparesis 466
heart failure 134, 136
kidney dis 302–5
lymphocytic leukaemia 359
mesenteric ischaemia 620
myeloid leukaemia 358 
obstructive pulmonary dis 

184–5, 812, 813F

pancreatitis 270
prostatitis 645
sensorineural deafness 464
spastic paraparesis 466
tubulointerstitial nephritis 

318

Churg–Strauss syn 556, 696
Chvostek’s sign 678F
Chylothorax 192
Ciclosporin 376

drug interactions 757

_OHCM_10e.indb   872

_OHCM_10e.indb   872

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Cimetidine 757
Cingulate herniation 830
Ciproﬂ oxacin 387
Circle of Willis 450, 451F
Cirrhosis 276–7
Clarithromycin 387
Claudication 36, 656
Clerking 25
Clindamycin 387
Clinical trials 525
Clonorchiasis 435
Clonus 68
Closed questions 7
Clostridium 

botulinum 436
difﬁ cile 259, 411, 428
perfringens 389, 428, 430 
tetani 436

Clotting screen 347
Cloudy urine 81
Clubbing 40, 77, 151F
Cluster headache 457
CNS 

alcohol eff ects 705
cancer 522 
TB 393
CO2 670
Coagulation 345F
disorders 344

Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis 

201

Co-amoxiclav 386
Coarctation of the aorta 156
Cocci 382 

Gram-negative 390
Gram-positive 388

Cockcroft–Gault equation 669
Codeine 533
Coeliac dis 266, 562
Cogan’s syn 556
Cognitive 

decline 489
state 64

Cohort studies 18
Cold autoimmune haemolytic 

anaemia 338

Colic 565, 606

biliary 634, 635

Colistin 386
Colitis

ischaemic 620
ulcerative 262–3
Collapsing pulse 42
Colloids 300, 666
Colon 

adenocarcinoma 249F 
arterial supply 621F
ischaemia 620
polyps 249F, 617
surgery 580

Colonoscopy 248, 249
Colorectal cancer 521, 616–17
Colostomy 582, 583F
Colour-ﬂ ow echocardiography 

110
Coma 786–9

hypopituitary 836
myxoedema 220, 834

Commensal 382
Common 

hypercholesterolaemia 691
peroneal nerve 452, 502
primary hyperlipidaemia 690

Communication 6–7, 519, 

537, 779

Community-acquired 

pneumonia 166, 167

Comparison measures 20
Compassion 3
Complete heart block 98, 

99F, 122 
Compliance 9
Computed tomography, see CT
COMT inhibitors 495
Concordance 9
Conduction aphasia 86
Conductive deafness 464
Condylomata 

acuminata 630
lata 630

Conﬁ dence intervals 20
Confounding 18
Confusion 576
Congenital 

cardiac arrhythmias 133
erythropoietic porphyria 692
heart dis 156–7
insensitivity to pain 8
Congestive heart failure 134
Conjugated 

hyperbilirubinaemia 272

Conjunctiva 

haemorrhage 560
pallor 325F

Conjunctivitis 438, 560, 561
Conn’s syn 228, 229, 664
Consent 568–9
Constipation 260–1, 534
Constrictive pericarditis 43, 154
Constructional dyspraxia 86
Contraceptive steroids, drug 

interactions 757

Contrast studies 

genitourinary 744
GI 742, 743F 
media 730, 748
Conus medullaris 466
Convergence 72
Convulsions 490
Coombs test 337F
Coordination 67, 69
Cope sign 608
Coping 11
Copper 268
Cor pulmonale 194–5
Cord 

compression 466, 508, 509F, 

528, 543

localizing lesions 447 
subacute combined 
degeneration 334
Corneal arcus 39F, 41
Coronary 

artery anatomy 113F
artery bypass graft (CABG) 

38F, 116, 123

spasm 709

Coronaviruses 169
Corrigan’s 

secret door 11
sign 38, 47, 146

Cortical 

lesions 447
vein thrombosis 480

Cortico-basal degeneration 

494

Corticobulbar palsy 507

Corticospinal tract 447
Corynebacterium diphtheriae 

873

389

Costochondritis 712
Co-trimoxazole 387
Cough 48
test 62
Couplet 128
Courvoisier’s law 272
Coxiella burnetii 424
Crabtree’s bludgeon 4
Crack dancing 87
Crackles 52
Cramp 65
Cranial nerves 70–3
Craniopharyngioma 234
Creatine kinase 688
Creatinine clearance 669
Crepitations 52
Crescendo (unstable) angina 

116, 118

Creutzfeldt–Jakob dis 696, 697
Cricothyroidotomy 772
Crigler–Najjar syn 696
Crimean-Congo HF 426, 427
Critical ischaemia 656 
Crocodile tears 500
Crohn’s dis 264–5, 562
Cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis 

556

Cryptococcus 408
Cryptococcus neoformans 

400, 517
Cryptorchidism 652
Cryptosporidium 400, 428, 432
Crystal 

arthropathies 548, 549F
urine 295
Crystalloids 300
CSF 

dangerous results 665
meningitis 822
normal 768

CT 730, 731F
AAA 732F
acute abdominal pain 732F, 

733F

angiography 657F, 746, 747F
bowel obstruction 611F
cardiac 108, 109F, 740 
colonography 742, 743F
contrast medium 730 
extradural haematoma 

483F
GI 742, 743F
head 746, 747F 
headache 746
hiatus hernia 255F
middle cerebral artery 

aneurysm 479F

neuroimaging 746, 747F
oesophageal cancer 618F
pancreatic pseudocyst 637F
PET and 523, 730
retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis 643F
SPECT 739
streak artefact 730 
stroke 746 
subdural haematoma 483F
urogram 744, 745F 
vascular 740 

Cubital tunnel syn 503
Cullen’s sign 636
Cushing, H. 6, 697

_OHCM_10e.indb   873

_OHCM_10e.indb   873

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

874

Cushing’s 
dis 224
syn 149, 203, 224–5, 529, 664

Cutaneous 

Detrusor 

overactivity 649
weakness/myopathy 81

Disease-modifying drugs 
antirheumatics 547
MS 496

Device placement conﬁ rmation 

Disseminated intravascular 

abscess 594
larva migrans 433F
leishmaniasis 423, 440
mycoses 408
TB 393

Cyanide poisoning 842
Cyanosis 34, 38F, 50F
Cyclophosphamide 376
Cyclospora cayetanensis 

428, 433

Cyst 565

Baker’s 694
branchial 598
breast 603
dermoid 594, 595F
epidermal 594, 595F
epididymal 320, 650
pilar 594
sebaceous 594 
third-ventricle colloid 498
thyroglossal 598 

Cystic 

ﬁ brosis 173
hygroma 598

Cystine 

crystals 295
stones 638, 639

Cystinosis 321
Cystinuria 321
Cystitis 296
Cytochrome P450 689
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 400, 
405, 428, 438–9, 517

Cytoplasmic ANCA 553
Cytotoxic drugs 524

D

D-dimers 346
Da Vinci robot 564F
Day case surgery 592
De Musset’s sign 47, 146
De Quervain’s thyroiditis 218
Deafness 464
Death 12–13
Decision-making 7
Decubitus angina 116 
Deep vein thrombosis 351, 

578, 579
Deﬁ brillation 770
Degeneration 
cord 334
cortico-basal 494
hepatolenticular 285

Dehydration 664
Déjà vu 491
Delirium 484, 485
tremens 280

Dementia 159, 485, 486–7, 507
Dengue 420
Depression 15
Dermal neuroﬁ bromas 514
Dermatitis 

herpetiformis 562
seborrheic 408
Dermatomes 454–5
Dermatomyositis 529, 552, 562
Dermatophytosis 408
Dermoid cyst 594, 595F
Descartes, R. 445

726, 727F

Devic’s syn 497, 698, 699
Devil’s grip 82
DEXA 683
Dexamethasone suppression 

test 225
Dextrose 666

drug interactions 757
–saline 666

Diabetes insipidus 240, 664
Diabetes mellitus 206–13 

biochemistry 664
blood pressure control 211
complications 210 
diagnosis 207 
emergencies 834
foot care 212, 213 
glucose monitoring 207
insulin 208
ketoacidosis 215, 832–3
nephropathy 210, 314
neuropathy 212–13 
oral hypoglycaemics 208
pregnancy 213 
retinopathy 210, 211F 
skin 562
surgery 213, 588 
treatment 208–9 
type 1 206, 207, 211 
type 2 206, 207, 208F, 211

Diagnosis 4
Diagnostic taps 765
Dialysis 292F, 306–7
Diamorphine 533, 574
Diaphragm 722
Diarrhoea 258, 259F, 428 
traveller’s 428, 429
with blood 429, 431 
without blood 429, 430 

Diastolic 
BP 40
failure 134

Diet

gluten-free 266
healthy 244
hospital inpatients 584
Diff erential white cell count 

330

Diff use oesophageal spasm 250
Digital subtraction angiogram 

745F, 747F

Dignitas 507
Digoxin 115

drug interactions 757
ECG 98, 115F 
poisoning 842
therapeutic range 756

Dihydropyridines 114
Dilated cardiomyopathy 152
Dimorphic blood ﬁ lm 328
Diphtheria 389
Dipstick urinalysis 294
Direct 

antiglobulin test 337F
Coombs test 337F
oral anticoagulants 114, 191, 

350, 590

Disaster planning 850
Disc herniation 543F

coagulation (DIC) 353, 354F

Distal renal tubular acidosis 

317

Distributive justice 3
Diuretics 114, 316, 317, 664, 757

drug interactions 757

Diverticular dis 628
Diverticulitis 628
Diverticulosis 249F, 628
Dizziness 36, 64, 462
Dizzy-plus syn 450
Doll’s head manoeuvre 789
Dopamine 449
agonists 495

Doppler echocardiography 110
Dorsal midbrain syn 708
Down’s syn 149
Doxycycline 387
DPP4 inhibitors 208
Drains 

ascites 764
chest 766–7
surgical 571

Dressing dyspraxia 86
Dressler’s syn 122, 698
Drip and suck 732
Driving 120, 158–9
Drop attacks 460
Drug-induced conditions

cramp 65
haemolytic anaemia 338
hepatitis 291
insomnia 29
jaundice 273
lupus 554
myopathy 510
nephropathy 318
osteomalacia 684
porphyria 693
sweating 29

Drug-resistant TB 395
Drugs 

allergy 8
anticipatory at end-of-life 

536

cardiovascular 114–15
cytochrome P450 689
cytotoxic 524
history 26
interactions 8, 757
nervous system 448–9
pregnancy 17
pre-operative 566
prescribing, see Prescribing
reactions 8
side-eff ect 8
therapeutic ranges 756
toxicity 8

Dry gangrene 660
Dubin–Johnson syn 698
Duchenne’s muscular 
dystrophy 510, 511

Duct ectasia 603
Ductal carcinoma in situ 602
Duke criteria 151
Dumping syn 622
Duodenal 

biopsy 248
ulcer 252, 253F

Duplex ultrasound 736

_OHCM_10e.indb   874

_OHCM_10e.indb   874

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

875

Dupuytren’s contracture 60F, 

ECG… continued

62, 77, 698, 699F

Dural venous sinus thrombosis 

456, 480

Duroziez’s sign 47, 146
Dying 12
Dysarthria 86
Dysbetalipoproteinaemia 691
Dysdiadokokinesis 67
Dysentry 428, 429, 431
Dyskinesia 468
Dyspepsia 59, 252–3
Dysphagia 64, 250, 251
Dysphasia 86, 87
Dysphonia 86
Dyspnoea 36, 48, 49, 94

exertional 30 
paroxysmal nocturnal 30, 49
post-operative 576

Dyspraxia 86
Dystonia 469
Dysuria 80, 293

E

Early diastolic murmur 46
Ebola 426–7
ECG 96–107 

acute coronary syn 118
atrial ﬁ brillation 98, 131F 
axis 96, 97 
bifascicular block 100
bigeminy 129F 
Brugada syn 695
capture beat 129F 
card method 96 
chest lead placement 100
complete heart block 98, 99F 
continuous monitoring 125
digoxin 98, 115F
exercise 125 
fusion beat 129F 
heart block 98, 99F 
heart rate calculation 97 
holter monitors 125 
hypercalcaemia 98
hyperkalaemia 98, 301F, 675F
hypocalcaemia 98 
hypokalaemia 98
hypothermia 849F
J wave 96 
left bundle branch block 

100, 101F 

left ventricular hypertrophy 

100

loop recorders 125 
low-voltage QRS complex 100
malignant hypertension 141F
metabolic abnormalities 98
Mobitz type I/II block 

98, 99F

myocardial infarction 98, 

103F, 104F, 118, 119F, 121F 

normal trace 97F
P wave 96 
paced rhythm 107F, 132, 133F 
pericarditis 154, 155F
PR interval 96 
pulmonary embolism 98
pulmonary hypertension 

105F

QRS complex 96, 100 
QT interval 96 
rate 96 
reading 96

reciprocal changes 99, 103F
rhythm 96 
right bundle branch block 

100, 102F 

right ventricular 

hypertrophy 100 
sinus bradycardia 98 
sinus rhythm 96 
sinus tachycardia 98 
ST depression 98
ST elevation 98 
ST segment 96 
T inversion 98 
T wave 96 
telemetry 125 
torsades de pointes 129F 
trifascicular block 100 
ventricular ﬁ brillation 129F
ventricular tachycardia 

106F, 129F

Wenckebach block 98, 99F
WPW syn 133 
Echinococcosis 435
Echinocytes (burr cells) 328, 

329F

Echocardiography 108, 110, 

111F, 153F, 740

Ecological studies 18
Ecstasy 843
Ectopia lentis 706, 707F
Ectopic 

ACTH production 224
calciﬁ cation 676
testis 652
thyroid tissue 218

Ectopics 128, 804
Eff ective dose 719
Eff usion

aspiration 765
pericardial 110, 154
pleural 54F, 170, 192
Ehlers–Danlos syn 149
Eisenmenger’s complex 156
Ejection 

systolic click 44
systolic murmur 46

Ekbom’s syn 698
El Escorial criteria 507
Elderly 16, 667
Electrocardiography, see ECG
Electrolytes 

dangerous levels 665
kidneys 668

Elemental feed 584
Elephantiasis 421
Elliptocytosis 338, 339F
Embolism 

post-MI 122
pulmonary 98, 190, 191, 351, 

818, 819F
Emphysema 184
Empyema 170, 192, 634
Encephalitis 824

acute demyelinating 406
Bickerstaff ’s brainstem 694
headache 456
herpes 404
Encephalopathy
hepatic 275
Wernicke’s 714
End colostomy 582
End ileostomy 582
End-of-life 536–7

End of the bed examination 32
Endocarditis 110, 150–1
Endocrine system
physiology 204
pregnancy 17
Endoscopy 248–9

retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography 742, 743F

US 742

Endotoxin 382
Endovascular stent 655F
Endovenous laser ablation 658
Energy requirements 585
Entamoeba histolytica 428, 

432–3

Enteral nutrition 584
Enteric 

arthropathy 550
fever 415

Enterobacteriaceae 391
Enterococcus faecalis 389
Enterohaemorrhagic E.coli 

431

Enterotoxigenic E.coli 430
Enterotoxin 382
Enzymes 
MI 119F
plasma 688, 689

Eosinophilia 330
Eosinophilic granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis 556, 696

Eosinophils 330, 331F
Epidemiology 18
Epidermal cyst 594, 595F
Epididymal 

appendage torsion 652
cyst 650

Epididymitis 651F
Epididymo-orchitis 650
Epidural 

analgesia 574
haematoma 482, 483F

Epigastric 

hernia 612 
pain 57

Epilepsy 159, 460, 490–1
antiepileptics 492 493
driving 159
pregnancy 493
status epilepticus 826, 827F
sudden unexpected death 

492

Epinephrine 449
Episcleritis 560
Epstein-Barr virus 405
Equity 3
Erectile dysfunction 230
Ergotamine/ergotism 757
Error 5
Ertapenem 386
Erythema 

ab igne 270
induratum 694
marginatum 142, 143F, 562
migrans 422F, 562, 563F
multiforme 562, 563F
nailfold 552
nodosum 562, 563F
palmar 62, 76

Erythrocyte sedimentation 

rate 372
Erythromycin 387
Erythropoietic protoporphyria 

692

_OHCM_10e.indb   875

_OHCM_10e.indb   875

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

876

Escherichia coli 391, 428, 429

enterohaemorrhagic/Shiga-

toxin producing 431

enterotoxigenic 430 

ESR 372
Essential thrombocythaemia 

366, 367F

Estimated glomerular ﬁ ltration 

rate (eGFR) 293, 669

Ethics 14
Evidence-based medicine 22
Examination 

abdomen 40, 60–1, 62–3
anus 63
breast 83
cardiovascular system 38–40
chest 63
coma 789
cranial nerves 70–3
GI system 62–3
musculoskeletal 74–7 
neurological system 66–9
older person 16
peripheral vascular system 

78–9
physical 32
pre-operative 567
rectum 63
respiratory system 50–3
routine, method and 

order 90
thyroid 84–5
Exenatide 209
Exercise ECG 125
Exertional dyspnoea 30 
Exomphalos 612
Exotoxin 382
Experimental studies 18
Extensor plantar reﬂ ex 68, 466
External beam radiotherapy 

527

Extradural haematoma 482, 

483F
Extrapyrimidal 

gait 467
speech 86

Extravasation 524
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis 198
Exudates 192
Eye 

ankylosing spondylitis 550
coma 789
cranial nerve lesions 72–3
diabetes 210, 211F
hypertension 139, 560
hyperviscosity syn 372F
infections 438–9
movements 70
neuroﬁ bromatosis 514F
ptosis 73
red 561
systemic conditions 560
thyroid dis 84, 85, 219
xerophthalmia 268
F

Fabry dis 320, 698
Face 32, 39, 40, 50, 52, 60, 62

masks 189
pain 65

Facial nerve 501F
lesions 70, 500

Facioscapulohumeral muscular 

dystrophy 510, 511

Factious blackouts 460
Factor V Leiden 374
Faecal incontinence 58
Faints 36, 64
Falciparum malaria 416, 

417, 418

Fallot’s tetralogy 157
Falls 16, 28
False 

aneurysms 654
negative 20
positive 20

Familial 

adenomatous polyposis 521
amyloidosis 370
cancers 521
combined hyperlipidaemia 

691

defective apolipoprotein 

B-100 691

hypercholesterolaemia 691
hyperchylomicronaemia 691
hypertriglyceridaemia 691
primary hyperlipidaemia 

690, 691

Family 

history 26
trees 27

Fanconi 

anaemia 698
syn 316
Farinelli 202F
Farmer’s lung 198
Fasciola hepatica 435
FAST campaign 471
Fasting hypoglycaemia 214
Fat necrosis 603
Fatigue 29
Fauré, G. 465
Feet

diabetic 212, 213
drop 466
Felty’s syn 698
Femoral 

canal 613F
catheterization 775
hernia 612 
nerve 452
stretch test 542
Fentanyl patch 533
Fertility 525
Fever 29

enteric 415
Lassa 426
Oroya 424
Q 424
relapsing 423
returning travellers 414–15
rheumatic 142
Rift Valley 426
Rocky Mountain spotted 422
spotted 422
trench 424
viral haemorrhagic 426–7
yellow 420

Fibreoptic bronchoscopy 164
Fibrinolysis 345
Fibroadenoma, breast 603
Fibroma 594
Fibromyalgia 558, 559

Fibrosis
cystic 173
idiopathic pulmonary 200F
lung 54F

Fibromyalgia… continued

progressive massive 201
progressive nephrogenic 

systemic 748
retroperitonal 643

Field defects 71
Filarial infection 439
Finger clubbing 40, 77, 151F
Fingerprick glucose 207
Fissure-in-ano 630
Fistula 565

in-ano 630

Fits 64
Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syn 698
Flaccid paraparesis 466
Flagella 382
Flatulence 58
Fleming, A. 383
Flight of ideas 89
Flow 

rate 761
volume loop 164, 165F

Flucloxacillin 386
Fluconazole 757
Fluids 

balance 300, 666, 667
drug interactions 757
end of life 537
overload 300
resuscitation 300
status 32
therapy 666, 667

Fluoride 

deﬁ ciency 268
teeth 247F

Fluoroquinolones 387
Fluticasone 183
Flying, DVT 579
Focal 

atrial tachycardia 127
dystonia 469
segmental 

glomerulosclerosis 313

seizures 491, 492

Folate 322

inhibitors of synthesis 387

Folic acid 244, 268
Follicular lymphoma 363
Fondaparinux 350
Fontaine classiﬁ cation 656
Fontan procedure 157
Food poisoning 428
Foot

diabetic 212, 213
drop 466

Fordyce glands 246
Foster Kennedy syn 698
Framing 7
Freckling 514
Fresh frozen plasma 348
Friedreich’s ataxia 149, 698, 700
Froin’s syn 700
Froment’s sign 75
Frontal lobe 
lesions 499
seizures 491

Fronto-temporal dementia 

486, 507

Fulminant hepatic failure 274
Functional incontinence 648
Fundoplication 624
Fungi 177, 408–9
Funnel chest 55
Funny turns 64

_OHCM_10e.indb   876

_OHCM_10e.indb   876

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

877

Furuncle 594
Fusidic acid 387
Fusion beat 129F, 133

G

Gadolinium 748
Gag reﬂ ex 70
Gait 

disorders 467
dyspraxia 86
GALS screen 540
neurological examination 68

Galactorrhoea 237F
Gallbladder 
cancer 619
necrosis 634
Gallop rhythms 44
Gallstone 634–5
ileus 634

GALS screen 540
Gambling 21
Gamma-glutamyltransferase 

291, 688
Ganglia 594, 595F
Gangrene 213F, 660

dry 660
gas 389, 660
wet 660

Gangrenous ischaemic colitis 

620

Gardner’s syn 700
Gas 

gangrene 389, 660
outside lumen 724
outside lungs 724
patterns in bowel 728, 729F
transfer coeffi  cient 164

Gastrectomy 622
Gastric 

bypass 626, 627F
carcinoma 619, 622
emptying and lavage 840
lavage 840
lymphomas 62
MALT 362
parietal cell antibody 553
surgery 622
ulcer 252

Gastrinoma 716, 717F
Gastritis 252
Gastroenteritis 428–31
Gastrointestinal

cancer diagnosis 522
decontamination 840
endoscopy 248, 249
examination 62–3
ﬂ uid replacement 667
history 56–7 
imaging 742, 743F
malabsorption 266, 267
symptoms 30, 58–9
TB 393
upper bleeding 57, 256–7, 

820, 821F
Gastro-oesophageal 
reﬂ ux dis 254, 624
varices 257
Gastroschisis 612
Gauss, C.F. 750F
Gaussian distribution 751
Gawande, A. 6
Gélineau’s syn 700, 701
Gene therapy 173
Generalized seizures 491, 492

Genetics 

Alzheimer’s dis 489
cancer 520–1
family trees 27

Genital 

candidiasis 413
herpes 404, 412
ulcers 412
Genitourinary 
history 80–1
imaging 744, 745F
surgery 580
symptoms 30
TB 393

Gentamicin 387

therapeutic range 756
Geographic tongue 246
German measles 406
Gerstmann–Sträussler–
Scheinker syn 696

Gerstmann’s syn 700
Giant cell arteritis 456, 556
Giant condylomata acuminata 
of Bushke & Loewenstein 
630

Giardiasis (Giardia) 428, 

429, 432
Gilbert’s syn 700
Gilles de la Tourette syn 700
Gillick competence 569
Gingivitis 246, 712
Gingivostomatitis 404
Gitelman syn 317
Glasgow Blatchford score 257
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 788
Glass tests 822F
Glaucoma 456, 561
Gliptins 208
Glitazone 208
Global Initiative for COPD 

(GOLD) 184

Glomerular basement 

membrane antibody 553
Glomerular ﬁ ltration rate (GFR) 

293, 668, 669

Glomerulonephritis 310–13
Glomerulosclerosis, focal 
segmental 313
Glossitis 246, 335F
Glucagon-like peptide 
analogues 209

Glucose 

5% 666
drug interactions 757
hypertonic 666
monitoring 207
–saline 666

Glucose-6-phosphate 

dehydrogenase deﬁ ciency 
338, 339F

Glutamic acid decarboxylase 

antibody 553

Gluten-free diet 266
Glycated haemoglobin 207
Glycogen storage dis 510, 704
Goitre 218, 219, 600
GOLD 184
Goodpasture’s dis 311, 556, 700
Goodsall’s rule 630
Gottron’s papules 76, 552, 562
Gout 538F, 541F, 548, 549F
Gouty trophi 74F
Graham Steell murmur 46
Gram-negative bacteria 390–1

Gram-positive bacteria 388–9
Gram stain 382
Granger, K. 6, 518
Granular cast 295
Granulation tissue 661
Granulomatosis with 

polyangiitis 556, 714
Granulomatous disorders

diff erential diagnosis 197
eye signs 560

Graves’ dis 218, 219, 601F
Grey Turner sign 636
Groin lumps 650, 651
Group-and-save 348
Guanarito virus 426
Guillain–Barré syn 447, 702, 703
Gummatous syphilis 412
Guyon’s canal 503
Gynaecological cancer 522 
Gynaecomastia 230

H

Haemangioma, liver 286, 737F
Haematemesis 30, 256
Haematocele 650
Haematology 

dangerous results 665
pregnancy 17
reference intervals 754

Haematoma 

epidural 482, 483F
extradural 482, 483F
perianal 630
subdural 482, 483F
Haematopoiesis 365F
Haematuria 81, 294 

non-visible 293, 647
visible 293

Haemochromatosis 149, 288–9
Haemodialysis 306, 840
Haemoﬁ ltration 306
Haemoglobin 343
Haemoglobinuria 336, 686
paroxysmal cold 338
paroxysmal nocturnal 338, 

704, 705
Haemolysis 336
Haemolytic 

anaemia 324, 336–9
uraemic syn 315
Haemophilias 344
Haemophilus inﬂ uenzae 391
Haemopneumothorax 192
Haemoptysis 48, 49
Haemorrhage 

conjunctival 560
nuclear medicine 738
primary 577 
reactive 577 
retinal 560 
secondary 577
shock 790
splinter 76, 150, 151F
subarachnoid 456, 478–9
subconjunctival 561

Haemorrhoids 632–3
Haemosiderinuria 336
Haemothorax 192
Halitosis 59
Hallux valgus 540F
Hamartoma, lung 174
Hand 38, 40, 41, 50, 52, 60, 62, 

74–7, 84, 85, 540
hygiene 411, 758F

_OHCM_10e.indb   877

_OHCM_10e.indb   877

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

878

Handicap 475
Handover 10
Hansen’s dis 441
Hanta virus 426
Hartmann’s solution 666
HAS-BLED 131
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis 220
HbA1C 207
HCO3– 670
Head injury 456, 828, 829F
Headache 64, 456–7 

cluster 457
CT 746
diff erential diagnosis 780
medication overuse 456 
post-lumbar puncture 769
tension 456 

Health-care associated 
infections 410–11

Healthy 

ageing 16
eating 244

Hearing 

loss 464
testing 70, 464

Heart

auscultation 40 
block 98, 99F, 122
chest X-ray 108, 109F, 722
murmurs 46–7
muscle dis 152–3
normal conduction 127F
rate calculation from 

ECG 97
sounds 44

Heart failure 134–7, 801F 

acute 134, 136
blood transfusion 348
chronic 134, 136
congestive 134
ﬂ uids 667
high-output 134
intractable 136
low-output 134
New York classiﬁ cation 135
with preserved ejection 

fraction 134 
Heat exhaustion 790
Heaves 39, 40 
Heavy chain dis 370
Heavy metal poisoning 842
Heberden’s nodes 77, 544
Heel–shin test 69
Helicobacter pylori 252, 253
Heliotrope rash 552, 562, 563F
Helminths 433
Hemianopia 71
Hemiballismus 87, 468
Henoch–Schönlein purpura 311, 

556, 702, 703F

Heparin 350
Hepatic 

encephalopathy 275
ﬂ ap/asterixis 62

Hepatitis
A 278
alcoholic 280, 281
autoimmune 284, 291
B 278, 279, 401
B vaccine 287
C 278, 279, 401
D 278
drug-induced 291
E 278

Hepatitis… continued

ischaemic 291
viral 278–9, 291 

Hepatocellular 

carcinoma 286
dysfunction 272, 291, 664
Hepatolenticular degeneration 

285

Hepatomegaly 63, 604
Hepatorenal syn 275
Hepcidin 289
Herbal remedies 319
Hereditary 

cancers 521
coproporphyria 692
elliptocytosis 338, 339F
haemochromatosis 288–9
non-polyposis colorectal 

cancer 521
ovalocytosis 338
spherocytosis 338, 339F
stomatocytosis 338
telangiectasia 708, 709F

Hernia 565

abdominal 612, 613F, 614
epigastric 612 
femoral 612 
hiatus 255
incisional 580, 612
indirect inguinal 612, 651F 
inguinal 612, 614, 651F
irreducible 614
Littre’s 612 
lumbar 612 
Maydl’s 612 
obturator 612 
paraoesophageal 255
paraumbilical 612 
Richter’s 612 
rolling 255
sciatic 612 
sliding 255, 612 
Spigelian 612 
umbilical 612 
Herniation syn 830
Herpes 

encephalitis 404
genital 404, 412
labialis 404
simplex virus 404
sine herpete 501
viruses 404–5
whitlow 404
zoster 462
zoster ophthalmicus 438

Heuristics 4
Hiatus hernia 255
Hickam’s dictum 4
Hidradenitis suppurativa 594
Hierarchy of evidence 22
High-output heart failure 134
Higher mental function 86–7
Hila 722
Hillis plot 379
Hip movements 69
Hippocratic oath 1
Hirsutism 230
Histamine 449
Histiocytosis X 704
Histoplasmosis 408
History 26

breast 82
cardiovascular 36–7
gastrointestinal 56–7

History… continued

genitourinary 80–1
neurological 64–5
older person 16
pre-operative 567
presenting complaint 26
respiratory 48–9
rheumatology 539

HIV 398–401

antiretrovirals 402–3
diff erential diagnosis 401
eye signs 560
heart dis 149, 401
neurocognitive disorders 517
neurology 517
opportunistic dis 400, 517
post-exposure prophylaxis 

398

pre-exposure prophylaxis 

398

testing 399
HLA-B27 551
Hoarseness 48
Hodgkin’s lymphoma 360–1
Holiday heart syn 126
Holmes–Adies pupil 72
Holt–Oram syn 149
Holter monitors 125
Holt’s law 26
Homocystinuria 706
Homografts 148
Hookworm 433
Hormones 204

parathyroid 222, 676
thyroid-stimulating 216
Horner’s syn 50F, 702, 703F
Hospital-acquired pneumonia 

166, 167

Hot potato voice 86
Hounsﬁ eld scale 730, 731F
Howell–Jolly bodies 328, 329F

5-HT 449

Human 

albumin solution 348
chorionic gonadotrophin 531
herpes viruses 404–5
immunodeﬁ ciency virus, 

see HIV

papilloma virus 406
T-cell lymphotrophic 

virus 517
Humours 323
Huntington’s dis 702
Hutchinson 
pupil 72
sign 438

Hyaline cast 295
Hydatid dis 435
Hydration, see Fluids
Hydroceles 650, 651F
5-hydroxytryptamine 449
Hyperaesthesia 559
Hyperaldosteronism 228, 229
Hyperalphalipoproteinaemia 

691

Hyperandrogenism 203
Hyperbilirubinaemia 272
Hypercalcaemia 98, 528, 529, 

676, 677

Hypercholesterolaemia 691
Hypereosinophilic syn 330
Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar 

state 834
Hyperhidrosis 29

_OHCM_10e.indb   878

_OHCM_10e.indb   878

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

879

Hyperkalaemia 98, 301, 674, 

675F

Hyperlipidaemia 41, 690–1
Hypermagnesaemia 679
Hypernatraemia 672
Hyperparathyroidism 222, 738
Hyperphosphataemia 

302, 679

Hyperpigmentation 32, 34
Hyperplasia

adrenal 224
prostate 642

Hyperprolactinaemia 236
Hypertension 93, 138–41

driving 158
idiopathic intracranial 498
malignant 138, 140, 141F
portal 257
pulmonary 105F
retinopathy 139, 560
white-coat 138

Hyperthyroid crisis 834, 835F
Hyperthyroidism 31, 216, 562

subclinical 221
Hypertonia 494
Hypertonic glucose 666
Hypertrophic 

cardiomyopathy 109F, 

110, 152

osteoarthropathy 529

Hyperuricaemia 680
Hyperventilation (syn) 53
Hyperviscosity (syn) 352, 372
Hypervolaemia 300
Hypnotics 29
Hypoalphalipoproteinaemia 

691

Hypobetalipoproetinaemia 

691

Hypocalcaemia 98, 678
Hypochromia 328
Hypocomplementaemic 

urticarial vasculitis 556
Hypoglycaemia 214, 460, 834
Hypoglycaemic 

hyperinsulinaemia 214

Hypogonadism 231
Hypokalaemia 98, 674
Hypokalaemic periodic 
paralysis 674
Hypomagnesaemia 679
Hyponatraemia 672, 673F
Hypoparathyroidism 203, 222
Hypophosphataemia 679, 684
Hypopituitarism 203, 232
Hypopituitary coma 836
Hypotension 170

intracranial 456
orthostatic 460
postural 40, 41

Hypothalamic–pituitary axis 

204F

Hypothermia 848–9
Hypothyroidism 31, 149, 203, 
216, 220, 221F, 216

subclinical 221
Hypovolaemia 300

shock 790

Hypoxia, post-operative 576

I

Iatrogenic hyponatraemia 672
IBD-unclassiﬁ ed 263
Ice water calorics 789

Ichthyosis 562
Idiopathic 

costochondritis 712
facial nerve palsy 500
generalized dystonia 469
intracranial hypertension 

498

pulmonary ﬁ brosis 200
scrotal oedema 652

IgA 

nephropathy 311, 694
vasculitis 556

Ileal pouch-anal anastomosis 

582

Ileostomy 582, 583F
Ileus 565, 729F
paralytic 611

Imaging

acutely unwell patient 749
cancer 523
cardiac 108, 740–1
contrast media 319, 730, 748
genitourinary 744, 745F
GI 742, 743F
neuroimaging 746, 747F

Imbalance 36
Imipenem 386
Immune 

complex vasculitis 556
thrombocytopenia 345
Immunity, active/passive 407
Immunization

hepatitis B 287
immunosuppression 407
pneumococcal 167
schedule 407
splenectomy 373
Immunoglobulins 686
Immunosuppression 
biochemistry 664
drugs 377
eye 438
pneumonia 166, 167, 400
renal transplantation 308
vaccination 407

Impaired fasting glucose 206
Impaired glucose tolerance 

206

Implanted cardioverter/
deﬁ brillator 125, 158

Impotence 230
Incidence 

proportion 18
rate 18

Incisional hernia 580, 612
Incisions 565
Inclusion body myositis 510
Incontinence 
faecal 58
urinary 648–9

Indigestion 59
Indirect 

antiglobulin test 337F
Coombs test 337F
inguinal hernia 612, 651F

Industrial dust dis 201
Infantile spasms 491
Infarcts

brainstem 470
cerebral 470
lacunar 470
myocardial 473
nailfold 76
right ventricle 122, 796

Infectious 

dis overview 380–1
malabsorption 266
mononucleosis 405

Infective endocarditis 150–1
Inferior gluteal nerve 452
Inﬂ ammatory myopathies 510
Inﬂ uenza 396–7
Inguinal 

canal 615
hernia 612, 614, 651F

Inhalers 183
Injection sclerotherapy 658
INR 351
Insecticide poisoning 843
Insomnia 29, 535
Insulin 

therapy 208
tolerance test 232
variable rate intravenous 

infusion 589

Insulinoma 215
Intention tremor 65, 468
Interdependence 475
Interferon-gamma release 

assay 394

Internal 

capsule 447
carotid arteries 450
jugular catheterization 775
International normalized ratio 

(INR) 351

Internuclear ophthalmoplegia 

73F

Interstitial lung dis 198
Interventional oncology 527 
Intestinal 

angina 620
ﬂ ukes 428
obstruction 610

Intracardiac electrophysiology 

112
Intracranial 

hypotension 456
pressure, raised 830, 831F
venous thrombosis 480, 481F

Intractable heart failure 136
Intravascular access device 

infections 410

Intravenous cannulae 760–1 

sizes and colour 761
Intravenous ﬂ uids 666, 667
drug interactions 757

Intrinsic factor antibody 553
Inulin clearance 669
Invasive aspergillosis 177
Inverse care law 3
Involuntary movements 

64, 468
Iodide 268
Iodine contrast agents 748
Ionizing radiation 

dose 719
nephritis 319
risks and beneﬁ ts 719

Iritis 550, 560, 561
Iron 

deﬁ ciency 268
deﬁ ciency anaemia 326
metabolism 289
plasma 327
poisoning 842

Irritable bowel syn 266, 267
Irritative bladder symptoms 81

_OHCM_10e.indb   879

_OHCM_10e.indb   879

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

880

Ischaemia 
colitis 620
colonic 620
critical 656
heart dis 37, 93, 117
hepatitis 291
limb 657
mesenteric 620
papillopathy 71

Isotope scan, thyroid 216, 217F
Itch 28
IV cannulae 760–1 

sizes and colour 761

IV ﬂ uids 666, 667

drug interactions 757

Ivabradine 115
Ivacaftor 173

J

J wave 96 
Jamais vu 491
James, L.S. 778F
Janeway lesions 38, 40, 150, 

151F

Japanese encephalitis virus 

437
Jaundice 272–3

drug-induced 273
obstructive 634
pneumonia 170
surgery 590

Jehovah’s Witnesses 349
Jendrassik manoeuvre 67
Jervell and Lange–Nielsen 

syn 702

Joint 

aspiration 541 
Charcot 213F
hand 75
position sense 69
range of movement 540
Jugular venous pressure (JVP) 

38, 43, 300

Junctional tachycardia 127, 806
Junin virus 426
Justice 14
Juvenile posterior subcapsular 
lenticular opacity 514

K

Kala-azar 423
Kallman’s syn 231
Kaposi’s sarcoma 400, 702, 703F
Katayama syn 434
Kawasaki dis 149, 556
Kayser–Fleischer rings 62, 285
KDIGO staging 298
Keloids 594, 595F
Kelvin, Lord 20
Keratoconjunctivitis 404

sicca 560
Keratoses 596
Ketoacidosis, diabetic 215, 

832–3

Kidney 

acute injury 298–301
ballottement 61F
biochemistry 664
chronic dis 302–5
electrolytes 668
inherited dis 320–1
medullary sponge 639
MRA 744, 745F
nuclear medicine 739

Kidney… continued
obstructed 641F
palpation 61, 62 
polycystic dis 320, 321F
toxins 318
transplantation 308–9
ultrasound 737F, 744, 745F
urate 680

King’s College Hospital criteria, 

liver failure 275 
Klebsiella pneumoniae 

168, 391

Klinefelter’s syn 149, 231
Klippel–Trénaunay syn 704
Knee 

ﬂ exion and extension 69
reﬂ exes 68, 466
Knight’s move 89
Koilonychia 62, 76, 327F
Koplik’s spots 406F
Korsakoff ’s syn 704
Kuru 697
Kussmaul 

respiration 53 
sign 43, 154

Kyphosis 55

L

Laboratory medicine 

dangerous results 665
principles 663 
Labyrinthitis 462
Lactate dehydrogenase 688
Lactic acidosis 834
Lacunar infarcts 470
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 

syn 512, 513, 529
Laminectomy 509F
Laminoplasty 509F
Lamotrigine 493
Lanceﬁ eld group 388, 389F
Landouzy–Dejerine syn 510
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 

704

Laparoscopic adjustable 

gastric band 626, 627F

Laparotomy 

clinical syn requiring 606
ﬁ rst successful 605 
post-operative 

complications 580

Large bowel 

gas patterns 728
obstruction 610, 611F
Large vessel vasculitis 556
Laryngocele 598
Lasègue’s sign 542
Laser ablation 658
Lassa fever 426
Late malignant ventricular 
arrhythmias 122

Lateral 

aberrant thyroid 600
cutaneous nerve of thigh 

502

medullary syn 450

Laxatives 260
LDL receptor defects 691
Leeuwenhoek’s microscope 

378F

Left bundle branch block 

100, 101F

Left iliac fossa pain 57
Left shift 328, 329F

Left upper quadrant 

mass 604
pain 57
Left ventricle

aneurysm 122
assist device 137
echocardiography 110
failure 134, 135F
hypertrophy 100

Leg 

arteries 656 
GALS screen 540
superﬁ cial veins 658F
swollen 579
varicose veins 658, 659
venous ulcers 660, 661
weakness 466
see also Lower limb 

Legal highs 841
Legionella pneumophila 168
Leishmaniasis 423, 440
Leprosy 441, 596
Leptospirosis 425
Leriche’s syn 704
Leuconychia 62, 74F, 276
Leucoplakia 246, 247F, 596
Leukaemia 352 

acute lymphoblastic 354, 

355F

acute myeloid 356–7 
antibiotics 352 
chronic lymphocytic 359
chronic myeloid 358 
Leukaemoid reaction 328
Leukoerythroblastic ﬁ lm 328
Levetiracetam 493
Levodopa 495
Levoﬂ oxacin 387
Lewy body dementia 486
Lhermitte’s sign 497
Liberski’s imperative 697
Libertarian paternalism 7
Life 379
Light 

reﬂ ex 72
touch 67

Light’s criteria 193 
Linezolid 387
Lipodermatosclerosis 661
Lipoma 594 
Lipopeptides 386
Lipoprotein lipase deﬁ ciency 

691
Liraglutide 209
Lisch nodules 514
Listeria 389, 428
Literature and medicine

Bennett 487
Blake 322
Brian 297
Browning 693
Dante 849
Donne 475
Ford 663
Hughes 37
James 261, 379
Kipling 778F
Lifton 1
Plato 5
Shakespeare 779
Steinbeck 269
Tennyson 569
Twain 592
Wright 145

_OHCM_10e.indb   880

_OHCM_10e.indb   880

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

881

Lithium 

drug interactions 757
therapeutic range 756

Littre’s hernia 612 
Livedo reticularis 557F
Liver 

adenoma 286
alcoholic dis 280, 291
biopsy 248
bleeding disorders 344
cholestasis predominant 

injury 291
cirrhosis 276–7
failure 274–5, 667
fatty inﬁ ltration 280, 291
ﬂ uke 435
function tests 291
haemangioma 286, 737F
hepatocellular predominant 

injury 291
metastases 286
non-alcoholic fatty liver 

dis 285

palpation 61, 62
percussion 61
skin manifestation of dis 562
transplantation 276, 277
tropical dis 435
tumours 286–7
ultrasound 737F

Local anaesthesia 572, 573
Locked-in syn 450
Locomotor assessment 540
Löffl  er’s 

eosinophilic endocarditis 704
syn 704
Loiasis 439
Loin pain 57, 293
London, O. 7
Long QT 133, 711
Long-term oxygen therapy 184
Longitudinal studies 18
Loop 

colostomy 582, 583F
diuretics 114, 317, 664
ileostomy 582
recorders 125

Looser’s zones 684, 685F
Lopez, T. 14
Low-molecular-weight heparin 

350

Low-output heart failure 134
Low-voltage QRS complex 100
Lower GI cancer 522 
Lower limb 

acute bilateral leg weakness 

466

neurological examination 

68–9

parkinsonism 494
peripheral artery dis 656–7
peripheral nerve tests 453
see also Leg

Lower motor neuron 446
Lown–Ganong–Levine syn 704
Lucid interval 482
Lumacaftor 173
Lumbar 

hernia 612 
puncture 768–9, 822

Lumps 

breast 82, 603F
groin 650, 651
intradermal 595 

Lumps… continued

Malabsorption 266, 267, 

neck 598 
scrotum 650, 651F
skin 594, 595F
subcutaneous 595
thyroid 600 

Lund and Browder chart 847
Lung 

abscess 170, 171F 
acute injury 186, 187F
anatomy 161F
biopsy 164
cancer 174–6, 522 
chest X-ray 724, 725F
consolidation 54F
examination 40
extensive collapse 54F
ﬁ brosis 54F
function tests 164
fungal infection 177
interstitial dis 198
nodules 175, 724
opaciﬁ cation 724, 725F
tumours 174–6
volumes 165F

Lupus 

nephritis 314, 554
vulgaris 393

Lyme dis 422
Lymph node 

causes of enlargement 594
cervical 60F, 62 
supraclavicular 60F
Lymphadenopathy 35
Lymphatic ﬁ lariasis 421
Lymphocytes 330, 331F
Lymphogranuloma venerum 

412
Lymphoma 

Burkitt’s 362, 363F
follicular 363
gastric 362
HIV 400
Hodgkin’s 360–1 
non-Hodgkin’s 362–3
skin 362, 363F
small-bowel 362
thyroid 600
Waldeyer’s ring 362

Lymphopenia 330
Lynch syn 521

M

McArdle’s dis 510, 704
McDonald criteria for MS 497
McDowell, E. 605
Machupo virus 426
Macrocytic anaemia 324, 

332, 333F
Macroglossia 246
Macrolides 387
Maddrey Discrimination 

Factor 281

Magnesium 268, 676, 679
Magnesium ammonium 

phosphate stones 638, 639

Magnetic resonance 

angiography 744, 745F, 746
cholangiopancreatography 

742, 743F

imaging, see MRI
venogram 481F
Major disasters 850

344, 562

Malaria 416–19
Malassezia 408
Maldescended testes 652
Malignant 

hyperparathyroidism 222
hyperpyrexia 572
hypertension 138, 140, 141F
melanomas 596, 597
mesothelioma 174
Mallory–Weiss tear 704
Malnourished hospital patients 

584

Malt worker’s lung 198
Mantoux test 394
MAO-B inhibitors 495
Marburg 426, 427
Marchiafava–Bignami syn 704
Marchiafava–Micheli syn 

704, 705

Marcus Gunn sign 72
Marfan’s syn 149, 706, 707F
MASCC score 353
Mass

abdomen 604
appendix 608
pelvic 604
scrotum 650, 651F
thyroid isthmus 598
see also Lumps

Massive blood transfusion 348
Mastectomy 580
Mastitis 603
Maydl’s hernia 612 
MDMA 843
MDRD equation 669
Mean arterial pressure 790
Mean cell volume 324
Measles 406
Mechanical valves 148
Meckel’s diverticulum 706
Medial medullary syn 712
Median 751
Median nerve 453, 502
Mediastinoscopy 164
Mediastinotomy 164
Mediastinum 722
Medical 

care 2–3
history 26
mathematics 20–1

Medicalization 23
Medication overuse headache 

456

Medium vessel vasculitis 556
Medulla 713F
Medullary sponge kidney 639
Mees’ lines 76
Megaloblastic anaemia 332, 

333F
Meig’s syn 706
Melaena 30, 256
Melanomas 596, 597
Memantine 489
Membranoproliferative 

glomerulonephritis 313
Membranous nephropathy 313
MEN syn 223
Ménétrier’s dis 706
Ménière’s dis 462
Meningitis 390, 456, 822, 823F
Meningococcus 390, 390F, 715F
Mental Capacity Act 15

_OHCM_10e.indb   881

_OHCM_10e.indb   881

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

882

Mental health
of doctors 15
driving 159
on wards 15

Mental Health Act 15
Mental state examination 

15, 88

Meralgia paraesthetica 502
Meropenem 386
MERS 169
Mesenteric ischaemia 620
Mesothelioma 174
Metabolic 

abnormalities ECG 98 
acidosis 300, 670
alkalosis 670
bone dis 682–5
ﬂ ap 468
myopathies 510
syn 206 
Metastases 
brain 529
liver 286

Metastatic calciﬁ cation 676
Metformin 208

drug interactions 757
Methaemalbuminaemia 336
Methicillin-resistant 

Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) 388, 567

Methotrexate 376

drug interactions 757

Metronidazole 387
Mexican hat cells 328, 343F
Meyer–Betz syn 607
Microalbuminuria 294, 686
Microangiopathic anaemia 

338, 339F

Microcytic anaemia 324
Microscopic polyangiitis 556
Microstomia 246, 247F
Mid-diastolic murmur 46
Mid-systolic click 44
Midbrain lesions 499
Middle cerebral artery 450

aneurysm 479F

Middle East respiratory syn 

(MERS) 169
Migraine 458–9
Mikulicz’s syn 706
Miliary TB 393
Miller, C.J. 15
Milroy dis 706, 707F
Mineral deﬁ ciencies 268
Minimal change dis 313
Minimally invasive surgery 592 
Mirizzi’s syn 272, 634
Mistakes 5
Mitral 

regurgitation 122, 144
stenosis 144
valve prolapse 144
Mixed connective tissue 

dis 552

Mixed hyperlipidaemia 690
Mobitz type I/II block 98, 

99F, 122

Mollaret’s meningitis 456
Monobactam 385
Monoclonal gammopathy of 

uncertain signiﬁ cance 370

Monocytes 330, 331F
Mononeuritis multiplex 

212, 502

Mononeuropathies 502–3
Moraxella catarrhalis 390
Morphine 533, 574
Mosquito-borne dis 420–1, 422
Motor 

Myocardial infarction… 

continued 
driving 120, 158
ECG 98, 103F, 104F, 118, 

119F, 121F

neuron dis 506
neuropathy 504

Mouth lesions 246–7, 534
Movement disorders 87
Moxiﬂ oxacin 387
MRA 744, 745F, 746 
MRC muscle weakness grading 

446
MRCP 742, 743F
MRI 734, 735F

cardiac 108, 109F, 740 
cord compression 509F
disc herniation 543F
enteroclysis 742 
enterography 742
genitourinary 744, 745F 
GI 742
head 746, 747F
intracranial venous 
thrombosis 481F
lumbar spine 769F
pituitary tumours 235F
T1-/T2-weighted 734
vascular 740 

MRSA 388, 567
Mucocoele 634
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis 

423

Muehrcke’s lines 62, 76
MUGA scan 740
Muller’s sign 47
Multifocal atrial tachycardia 

126, 806

Multiple 

endocrine neoplasia 223 
gated acquisition scan 740
sclerosis 496–7, 699
system atrophy 494

Mumps 406
Münchausen’s syn 706, 707
Murmurs 46–7
Murphy’s sign 634
Muscle weakness 64

grading 446

Muscular dystrophies 510, 511
Musculoskeletal 

hand examination 74–7
screening 539
symptoms 31

Mushroom worker’s lung 198
Mutations 520
Myalgic encephalomyelitis 558
Myasthenia gravis 512, 513
Myasthenic crisis 512
Mycetoma 177
Mycobacterium 
leprae 441
tuberculosis 392

Mycoplasma pneumoniae 168
Mycosis fungoides 596
Myelodysplasia 357
Myelodysplastic syn 357
Myeloﬁ brosis 366, 367F
Myeloma 314, 368–9
Myeloproliferative disorders 366
Myiasis 441
Myocardial infarction 118 

biochemistry 664
complications 122

enzyme changes 119F
NSTEMI 118, 120, 798, 799F
STEMI 118, 120, 796, 797F 
Myocardial perfusion imaging 

741

Myocarditis 152, 153, 170
Myoclonic seizures 491, 492
Myoclonus 468
Myoglobinuria 686
paroxysmal 706
Myopathic gait 467
Myopathy 510, 511
Myotonic 

disorders 510
dystrophy 149, 510, 511

Myxoedema, see 

Hypothyroidism
Myxoedema coma 220, 834

N
Nailfold 

erythema 552
infarcts 76

Nails 74, 76

fungal dis 408
Terry’s 76, 276

Naloxone 574
Narcolepsy 700, 701
Narrow complex tachycardia 

126, 806–7
Nasal cannulae 189
Nasogastric tubes 759
National Health Service 2
Natriuretic peptides 137
Nausea and vomiting 250
palliative care 534
post-operative 576
Necator americanus 433
Neck 38, 50, 52, 60

important structures 599F
lumps 598 
veins 587F

Necrobiosis lipoidica 562, 563F
Necrosis 
fat 603
gallbladder 634
pancreas 636

Necrotizing 

fasciitis 660
ulcerative gingivitis 712

Needle 

cricothyroidotomy 772
pericardiocentesis 773
stick injury 399

Negative 

predictive value 20
symptoms 89

Neisseria 

gonorrhoea 413
meningitidis 390, 822

Nelson’s syn 76, 224
Nematodes 433
Neologism 89
Nephritic glomerulonephritis 

310, 311

Nephritis

lupus 314, 554
radiation 319
tubulointerstitial 318

_OHCM_10e.indb   882

_OHCM_10e.indb   882

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

883

Nephroblastoma 644
Nephrogenic ﬁ brosing 

dermopathy 748
Nephrolithiasis 638–9
Nephropathy

analgesic 319
aristolochic acid 319 
Balkan endemic 319
diabetic 210, 314
IgA 311, 694
membranous 313
radiocontrast 319
sickle cell 315
tubulointerstitial 318
urate 319
Nephrotic 

glomerulonephritis 310, 313
syn 293, 312
Nephrotoxins 318
Nerve root 

impingement 509
lesions 543

Nesidioblastosis 215
Neuralgia 

post-herpetic 65
trigeminal 457
Neuritis, optic 71
Neuroborreliosis 422
Neurocardiogenic syncope 460
Neurocysticercosis 437
Neuroﬁ brillary tangles 489F
Neuroﬁ bromatosis 514–15
Neurogenic hyperventilation 53
Neuroimaging 746, 747F
Neuroleptic malignant syn 843
Neurological system
drugs and 448–9 
examination 66–9
history 64–5
infections 436–7
lesion localization 446–7
symptoms 31

Neuroma, acoustic 462, 

463F, 514

Neuromuscular junction 513
Neuromyelitis optica 497, 

698, 699
Neuropathy

autonomic 212, 505
diabetic 212–13
HIV 517
motor 504
paraneoplastic 529
peripheral 447
sensory 504
Neuropeptides 449
Neurosis 89
Neurosurgical emergencies 

543

Neurosyphilis 412
Neurotransmitters 448, 449
Neutropenia

antibiotics 352
causes 330
pneumonia 166, 167
sepsis 528
Neutrophilia 330
Neutrophils 330, 331F
NICE 3
Nicotinamide deﬁ ciency 268
Nicotine gum/patches 93
Nicoumalone 757
Nil by mouth 585
Nintedanib 200

Nipple discharge 82
Nissen fundoplication 624
Nitrofurantoin 385
Nocardia 389
Nocturia 81
Nodule

Lisch 514
lung 175F, 724
neuroﬁ bromas 514
rheumatoid 594, 595F
Sister Mary Joseph 710, 

711F

subcutaneous 142
Nominal dysphasia 86
Non-alcoholic fatty liver 

dis 285

Non-dihydropyridines 114
Non-gonococcal urethritis 413
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 

362–3

Non-maleﬁ cence 14
Non-MALT gastric lymphoma 

362

Non-pitting oedema 35
Non-polyposis colorectal 

cancer 521

Non-rebreathing mask 189
Non small cell lung cancer 

174, 176

Non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI) 

118, 120, 798 799F

Non-steroidal anti-

inﬂ ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDS) 545, 574
Non-sustained ventricular 
tachycardia 122
Non-visible haematuria 

293, 647
Noonan’s syn 149
Noradrenaline 449
Norepinephrine 449
Normal 

distribution curve 751
range 662, 752–4
saline 666, 757

Normocytic anaemia 324
Norovirus 428, 430
Nosocomial infections 382, 

410–11
NSAIDS 545, 574
NSTEMI 118, 120, 798, 799F
Nuclear medicine 108, 738–9
Nudge 7
Number needed to treat 21
Nutrition

disorders 268
enteral 584
healthy eating 244
parenteral 586
requirements 585
supplements 244
support 584
Nystagmus 70

O

Oat cell lung cancer 174, 176
Obesity 34

surgery for 626, 627F

Obligate intracellular bacteria 

382
Obstruction

bladder neck 649
bladder symptoms 81
bowel 610, 611F

Obstruction… continued

jaundice 634
kidney 641F
sleep apnoea 194
urinary tract 640–1

Obturator 

hernia 612 
nerve 452
Occam’s razor 4
Occipital lobe 
lesions 499
seizures 491
Odds ratio 20
Oedema 35, 40 
non-pitting 35
periorbital 35
pitting 35, 39F 
post-operative leg 579
pulmonary 800
scrotal 652
Oesophagus

Barrett’s 254, 695
cancer 250, 618 
rupture 624
spasm 250
stricture 250

Off -legs 28
Ogilvie’s syn 611, 706
Older people 16, 667
Oliguria 81, 293, 576
On call 10
Onchocerciasis 439
Oncogenes 520
Oncogenic 

hypophosphataemia 684
viruses 405
Onycholysis 76
Opaciﬁ cation 724, 725F
Open questions 7
Opening snap 44
Ophthalmoscopy 70
Opiate poisoning 842
Opioids 533, 574
Opisthorchiasis 435
Opportunistic dis 400, 517
Optic 

atrophy 71, 560
neuritis 71

Oral 

hairy leucoplakia 246
hypoglycaemics 208
lesions 246–7, 534

Orchitis 651F
Organ 

donation 13
rupture 606

Organophosphate poisoning 

843

Orion constellation 2F
Oroya fever 424
Orthodromic conduction 127
Orthopnoea 49
Orthostatic hypotension 460
Ortner’s cardiovocal syn 708
Oseltamivir 396, 397
Osler, W. 6, 24F
Osler–Weber–Rendu syn 708, 

709F

Osler’s nodes 38, 40, 150
Osmotic diuretics 316
Osteitis 

deformans 685
ﬁ brosa cystica 222

Osteoarthritis 75F, 541F, 544

_OHCM_10e.indb   883

_OHCM_10e.indb   883

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

884

Osteomalacia 684, 685F
Osteoporosis 682–3
Ostium primum defect 156
Ostium secundum defect 156
Ototoxicity 462
Ovalocytosis 338
Ovary 

cancer 521 
polycystic 230

Overactive bladder syn 648
Oxycodone 533
Oxygen therapy

acute exacerbations of 

COPD 812

long-term for COPD 184 
respiratory failure 189
P

p-value 20
P wave 96 
Pacemaker 132–3

continuous ECG monitoring 

125

driving 158
ECG 107F, 132, 133F
letter codes 132
permanent 132
syn 133
tachycardia 133
temporary 132, 776–7
terminology 133
transcutaneous 777

Pack-years 26
Paget’s dis 
bone 685
breast 708, 709F

Pain 8 

abdomen 30, 57, 607F, 609, 

732F, 733F

back 542
bone 369
breast 82
chest 36, 48, 94, 95, 784
congenital insensitivity to 8
control 532, 574, 575F
epigastric 57
face 65
left iliac fossa 57
left upper quadrant 57
loin 57, 293
pelvic 57
pleuritic 94
referred 609
right iliac fossa 57
right upper quadrant 57
spiritual 535

Palliative care 136, 532–7
radiotherapy 526

Pallor 32, 34
Palmar erythema 62, 76
Palpation 

abdomen 61, 62
aorta 61, 62
axilla 83 
breast 83 
chest 52 
kidneys 61, 62
liver 61, 62
peripheral vascular system 

78, 79

praecordium 39 
spleen 61, 62
thyroid 84, 85

Palpitations 36, 37, 94

Palsy

Bell’s 500
bulbar 86, 506, 507
corticobulbar 507
pseudobulbar 86, 507
supranuclear 494
Todd’s 712

Pancoast’s syn 708
Pancreas

carcinoma 270
necrosis 636
pseudocyst 636, 637F
Pancreatitis 270, 636–7, 667
Pancytopenia 364
Pandemic inﬂ uenza 396, 397
Panhypopituitarism 232
Pansystolic murmur 46
Papilloedema 71, 560F
Pappenheimer bodies 328, 329F
Paracetamol 
dose 574
KCHC for liver failure 275
poisoning 844, 845F

Paraesthesiae 65
Paralysed patients 467
Paralytic ileus 611
Paraneoplastic syn 529
Paraoesophageal hernia 255
Paraphimosis 645
Paraproteinaemia 370
Paraproteins 531
Paraquat poisoning 843
Parasitic gastroenteritis 428
Parathyroid hormone 222, 676
Paratyphoid 415
Paraumbilical hernia 612 
Parenteral nutrition 586
Parietal lobe 
lesions 499
seizures 491
Parinaud’s syn 708
Parkinsonism 494
Parkinson’s 

dis 494, 495
plus syn 494

Parkland formula 846
Paronychia 76
Paroxysmal 

cold haemoglobinuria 338
myoglobinuria 706
nocturnal dyspnoea 30, 49
nocturnal haemoglobinuria 

338, 704, 705

Parsonage–Turner syn 502
Parvus et tardus 146
Passive immunity 407
Past medical history 26
Patient-centred questions 7
Patient-controlled analgesia 

341

Paul–Mikulicz colostomy 582
PDE5 inhibitors 230, 231
Peak expiratory ﬂ ow 162, 181F
Peak ﬂ ow charts 181F
Pectus 

carinatum 55
excavatum 55

Pellagra 268
Pelvic 

mass 604
pain 57

Pemphigus 529
Penicillins 385, 386

allergy 384

Penis

angulation 708
benign dis 645
cancer 644

Peptic ulcer dis 252–3
Percussion 

abdomen 61, 63
ascites 61
bladder 61
chest 51, 52
liver 61
spleen 61
thyroid 84, 85

Percutaneous 

coronary intervention 

116, 796

nephrostomy 744
transluminal angioplasty 656

Perianal 

haematoma 630
problems 630
warts 630
Pericardial 
dis 154
eff usion 110, 154
friction rub 46
knock 44

Pericardiocentesis 773
Pericarditis 122, 154, 155F, 170

constrictive 43, 154
Perinuclear ANCA 553
Period prevalence 18
Periorbital 

oedema 35 
purpura 371F

Peripheral 

arterial dis 656–7
blood ﬁ lm 323F, 328, 329F
cyanosis 34, 38F
inserted central cannulas 

774

nerve tests 452–3
nerves 454–5 
neuropathies 447
pulses 79
stigmata 32
vascular system 

examination 78–9
Peritoneal dialysis 306
Peritonitis 

laparotomy 606
spontaneous bacterial 276

Pernicious anaemia 334
Peroneal muscular atrophy 696
PET 739
PET-CT 523, 730
Petechial rash 822
Peutz–Jeghers syn 521, 708, 

709F

Peyronie’s dis 708
pH 670
Phaeochromocytoma 228, 229, 

738, 837
Phalen’s test 74, 503
Pharyngeal pouch 598
Phenothiazine poisoning 843
Phenoxymethylpenicillin 386
Phenytoin

drug interactions 757
epilepsy 493
therapeutic range 756

Philadelphia chromosome 358
Phimosis 645
Phlegmon 634

_OHCM_10e.indb   884

_OHCM_10e.indb   884

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

885

Phosphate 268, 676, 679
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors 

230, 231
Phrenic nerve 502
Physical 

examination 32; see also 

Examination

signs 28

Physician-assisted suicide 537
PICC lines 774
Pick’s dis 486
Pigeon chest 55
Pigeon-fancier’s lung 198
Pilar cyst 594
Piles 632–3
Pill-rolling 65
Pilonidal sinus 630
Pin prick test 67
Pink puff ers 184
Piperacillin+ tazobactam 386
Pirferidrone 200
Pitted nails 76
Pitting oedema 35, 39F
Pituitary 

apoplexy 234
tumours 234, 235F

Pityriasis versicolor 408, 409F
Pizza-pie fundus 438F, 560 
Placebo eff ect 9
Plague 425
Plain X-ray

abdomen 728, 729F, 744
bowel obstruction 611F
chest, see Chest X-ray
ﬁ rst 718F
gout 541F
osteoarthritis 541F 
osteomalacia 685F
Paget’s dis 685F
rheumatoid arthritis 541F 
rickets 685F

Plantar reﬂ exes 68, 466
Plasma 

biochemistry 665
calcium 676
cell dyscrasias 369
enzymes 688, 689
fresh frozen 348
iron 327
proteins 686
toxicology 840
viscosity 373

Plasmodium spp. 416–19
Platelet 

disorders 344
transfusion 348, 364

Plato 5
Pleomorphic adenomas 599
Pleural eff usion 54F, 170, 192

aspiration 765

Pleural ﬂ uid analysis 193
Pleural rub 52
Pleuritic pain 94
Pneumaturia 81
Pneumococcal 

pneumonia 168
vaccine 167
Pneumocystis 

jirovecii 168, 400, 401F
pneumonia 168

Pneumomediastinum 724
Pneumonia 166–71

aspiration 166, 167
community-acquired 166, 167

Pneumonia… continued
complications 170
emergencies 816, 817F
empirical treatment 167 
hospital-acquired 166, 167
immunocompromised 

166, 167
speciﬁ c 168 
ventilator-associated 410

Pneumonic plague 425
Pneumoperitoneum 607F
Pneumothorax 190 
aspiration 767
chest X-ray 724, 725F, 749F
click 52
emergencies 814, 815F 
spontaneous 54F
tension 54F, 190, 767, 814

POEMS syn 220
Poikilocytosis 327F, 328
Point prevalence 18
Poiseuille’s law 761
Poisoning 838–45
Poliomyelitis 436
Polyarteritis nodosa 149, 

556, 557F
Polychromasia 328
Polycystic 

kidney dis 320, 321F
ovarian syn 230
Polycythaemia 366

vera 366

Polymeric feed 584
Polymyalgia rheumatica 557
Polymyositis 529, 552
Polymyxin B 386
Polymyxins 386
Polyneuropathies 504, 505
acute inﬂ ammatory 

demyelinating (GBS) 447, 
702, 703
sensory 212
Polyomavirus 406
Polyps 249F, 617
Polyuria 81, 293
Porphyria cutanea tarda 692
Porphyrias 692–3
Portal hypertension 257
Positive 

predictive value 20
symptoms 89

Positron emission tomography 

(PET) 739
PET-CT 523, 730

Post-exposure prophylaxis 398
Post-herpetic neuralgia 65
Post kala-azar 423
Post-lumbar puncture 
headache 769

Post-operative complications 

576–7, 580

Post-prandial hypoglycaemia 

214

Post-streptococcal 

glomerulonephritis 311

Posterior cerebral artery 450
Postural 

hypotension 40, 41
tremor 65, 468

Potassium 

IV ﬂ uids 667
kidney 300, 668
-sparing diuretics 114, 

317, 757

Pott’s syn 708, 709F
Power 66, 69
PR interval 96 
Praecordium 39, 40
Prednisolone 376
Pre-excited atrial ﬁ brillation 131
Pre-exposure prophylaxis 398
Pregnancy 17

acromegaly 238
diabetes 213 
drug prescribing 17
epilepsy 493
hypothyroidism 220
migraine 458
physiological changes 17
radiology 17 
sepsis 17
urinary tract infection 297

Premature ventricular 

contractions 122
Pre-operative care 566–7
Presbyacusis 464
Prescribing 8

antibiotics 384
chronic kidney dis 305
liver failure 275
NSAIDS 545
older people 16
porphyria 693
pregnancy 17 

Presenting complaint 26
Pressure ulcers 473F
Pretibial myxoedema 218, 562
Prevalence 18
Primary 

atrophic hypothyroidism 220
autonomic failure 505
biliary cholangitis 282
bladder neck obstruction 649
hyperlipidaemias 690, 691
lateral sclerosis 506
PCI 796
sclerosing cholangitis 282, 

283F
survey 779

Prinzmetal’s angina 116, 117, 

708, 709

Proctalgia fugax 630
Progressive 

bulbar palsy 506
massive ﬁ brosis 201
multifocal 

leukoencephalopathy 517

muscular atrophy 506
nephrogenic systemic 

ﬁ brosis 748

supranuclear palsy 494

Prolactinoma 236
Prolapse

mitral valve 144
rectal 630
Pronator drift 67
Proprioception 67
Proptosis 85
Prostate 

benign hyperplasia 642
cancer 521, 644, 645 
-speciﬁ c antigen 530, 645

Prostatitis 296, 645
Prosthetic valves 148

INR 351
murmurs 47 
sounds 44

Protein C deﬁ ciency 374

_OHCM_10e.indb   885

_OHCM_10e.indb   885

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

886

Protein:creatinine ratio 294
Protein S deﬁ ciency 374
Proteins 

plasma 686
urinary 686

Proteinuria 293, 294
Proteus mirabilis 391
Prothrombin 

gene mutation 374
time 346

Purpura 

Henoch–Schönlein 311, 556, 

702, 703F

meningococcal sepsis 715F
periorbital 371F
thrombotic 

thrombocytopenic 315

Pyelonephritis 296
Pyoderma gangrenosum 

562, 563F

Proximal renal tubular acidosis 

Pyrexia 

316

Pruritus 28, 535

ani 630

Pseudoaneurysm 654
Pseudoathetosis 87, 468
Pseudobulbar 
eff ect 507
palsy 86, 507

Pseudo-Cushing’s 225
Pseudocyst, pancreas 636, 

637F

Pseudofusion beat 133
Pseudogout 549F
Pseudohypoparathyroidism 

203, 222, 223F

Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa 391
pneumonia 168

Pseudo-obstruction 611
Pseudopseudofusion beat 

133

Pseudopseudohypo-

parathyroidism 222

Psittacosis 168
Psoas sign 608
Psoriatic arthritis 551
Psychiatry 15, 88, 89
Psychogenic gait 467
Psychosis 89
Ptosis 73
Pulfrich eff ect 497
Pulmonary 

embolism 98, 190, 191, 351, 

818, 819F
eosinophilia 704
hypertension 105F
oedema 800
regurgitation 148
–renal syn 700
stenosis 148
TB 393, 384

Pulse 

anacrotic 42
bisferiens 42
bounding 42
brachial 38
carotid 38
collapsing 42
oximetry 162
peripheral 79
pressure 38, 40
radial 38, 42
radio-femoral delay 40
radio-radial delay 40
rate and rhythm 42
waterhammer 42
waveforms 42F

Pulseless dis 712
Pulsus 

alternans 42
paradoxus 42
Pupils 70, 72, 789
Purines 449

of unknown origin 442–3
post-operative 576

Pyridoxine 268
Pyruvate kinase deﬁ ciency 338

Q

Q
Q fever 424
QALY 3
QRISK2 score 93
QRS complex 96, 100 
QT interval 96 
long 133, 711

Questions 7
Quincke’s sign 38, 40, 47, 146

R

Rabies 436
Radial 

nerve 453, 502
pulse 38, 42

Radiation 
dose 719
nephritis 319
risks 719

Radiculopathy 508
Radiocontrast nephropathy 319
Radio-femoral delay 40
Radiofrequency ablation 658
Radioiodine 218
Radioisotope therapy 527
Radiology 

acutely unwell patients 749
cancer 523, 526, 527
chest 164
eff ective doses 719
heart 108 
interpreting images 721
pregnancy 17
presenting images 721
requests 720 
risks and beneﬁ ts 719
Radionuclide imaging 746
Radio-radial delay 40
Radiotherapy 526–7
Raised intracranial pressure 

830, 831F

Ramsay Hunt syn 501
Randomized controlled 

trials 19

Range 751

joint movement 540

Ranula 246
Rash 

heliotrope 552, 562, 563F
meningitis 822
returning travellers 415
SLE 555F
Rationing 3
Raynaud’s 
dis 708
phenomenon 708, 709
syn 708

Reablement 474
Reactive 

arthritis 551
haemorrhage 577

Rectal 

bleeding 629
examination 63
prolapse 630

Recurrent meningitis 456
Red cell 

cast 295
distribution width 325
transfusion 348, 364

Red eye 561
Red ﬂ ags 542, 780
Reed–Sternberg cell 361F
Re-emergent tremor 468
Re-enablement 474
Refeeding syn 587
Reference intervals 662, 752–4
Referral 10, 33
Referred pain 609
Reﬂ exes

ankle 68
anocutaneous 63
gag 70
knee 68, 466
lower limb 68
plantar 68, 466
pupils 72, 789
upper limb 67
Refsum dis 710
Refusing treatment 402, 

403, 569

Regional anaesthesia 572
Regular tachycardias 127
Regurgitation 
aortic 47, 146
GI 59
mitral 122, 144
pulmonary 148
tricuspid 148
Reiter’s syn 551
Relapsing 
fever 423
polychondritis 552

Relative aff erent pupillary 

defect 72

Relative risk 20
Remnant particle dis 691
Renal 

arteriography 744, 745F
biopsy 310
cell carcinoma 644
dis presentation 293 
failure 680
manifestations of systemic 

dis 314–15

nuclear medicine 739
osteodystrophy 684
phakomatoses 320
replacement therapy 301, 

305, 306–9
stones 638–9, 680
transplantation 308–9
tubular acidosis 316, 317
tubules 316–17
urate 680

Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 

system 668

Reperfusion therapy 796
Residual volume 164
Resilience 11
Resource rationing 3

_OHCM_10e.indb   886

_OHCM_10e.indb   886

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

887

Respiratory 

acidosis 670
alkalosis 671
distress 53
examination 50–3 
failure 170, 188–9
history 48–9 
important presentations 54
segments 53F
viruses 406

Resting tremor 65, 468
Restless legs 698
Restrictive cardiomyopathy 152
Reticular opaciﬁ cation 724
Reticulocytes 328, 329F
Retina 

artery occlusion 560
diabetic 210, 211F
haemorrhage 560
hypertensive 139, 560
hyperviscosity 372F
vein occlusion 560
Retractile testis 652
Retrograde pyelography 744
Retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis 643
Retroviruses 517
Reye syn 396
Rhabdomyolysis 319
Rheumatic fever 142
Rheumatoid 

arthritis 149, 541F, 546–7
factor 553
nodules 594, 595F

Rheumatology 
deﬁ nition 538 
history 539 
investigations 541

Rhonchi 52
Riboﬂ avin 268
Richter’s hernia 612 
Rickets 684, 685F
Rickettsial dis 422
Rifabutin 387
Rifampicin 387
Rifamycins 387
Rifapentine 387
Rift Valley fever 426
Right bundle branch block 

100, 102F

Right heart 

dynamics 110
valve dis 148
Right iliac fossa 
mass 604
pain 57

Right shift 328
Right upper quadrant pain 57
Right ventricle 
failure 122, 134
hypertrophy 100
infarction 122, 796
Rigid bronchoscopy 164
Rigors 29
Rinne test 464
Rituximab 363
River blindness 439
Rockall score 257
Rocky Mountain spotted 

fever 422

Rolling hiatus hernia 255
Romaña’s sign 423
Romano–Ward syn 710
Romberg’s test 68
Rome consensus 261

Röntgen, W. 718F
Root compression 508
Rotavirus 428, 430
Roth’s spots 150, 560
Rotor syn 710
Rouleaux formation 328, 329F
Roundworm 433
Roux-en-Y 

bypass 626, 627F
reconstruction 622, 623F

Rovsing’s sign 608
Rubella 406
Rubeosis iridis 210
Rule of nines 846
Rupture

AAA 654
Berry aneurysm 478
oesophagus 624
organ 606
S

Sabia virus 426
Sabre tibia 685F
Sacroiliitis 542
Safe triangle 767
St Vitus’ dance 142, 469
Salbutamol 183
Salicylate poisoning 844
Saline (0.9%) 666, 757
Salivary gland 599
Salmeterol 183
Salmonella

non-typhoidal 428, 431
paratyphi 415
Saphena varix 658
Sapovirus 428
Sarcoidosis 149, 196
Sarcoptes scabiei 440
SARS 169
Saunders, C. 532
SBAR 10
Scabies 440
Scalded skin syn 388
Scapula winging 511F
Schistocytes 328
Schistosomiasis 434
Schopenhauer, A. 6
Schwannomatosis 514
Sciatic 

hernia 612 
nerve 452, 502

Scleritis 560
Scleroderma renal crisis 315
Sclerosis 

amyotrophic lateral 506, 507
aortic 146
hand 75F
multiple 496–7, 699
primary lateral 506
systemic 149, 552
Sclerotherapy 658
Scoliosis 55
Scratch test 62
Screening 

alcohol use 281
cancer 530
medicalization 23
MRSA 567
musculoskeletal dis 539
thyroid function 217

Scribner shunt 307
Scrotum 

idiopathic oedema 652
lumps 650, 651F

Scrub typhus 422
Scurvy 268
Seasonal inﬂ uenza 396
Sebaceous cyst 594
Seborrheic dermatitis 408
Secretions 537
Seizures 490, 491, 492
Selenium 268, 679
Self-catheterization 763
Semmelweis, I. 758
Sensations 64, 67, 69
Sensitivity 20
Sensorineural deafness 464
Sensory 

deﬁ cits 446, 447
neuropathy 504

Sentinel node biopsy 603
Sepsis 17, 792, 793F

meningococcal 390, 715F
neutropenic 528

Septic 

arthritis 544
shock 792
Septicaemia 170
Septicaemic plague 425
Serotonin 449
Serum 

osmolality 668
thyroglobulin 216

Severe acute respiratory syn 

(SARS) 169

Sexually transmitted infection 

412–13

Sézary syn 363F, 596
SGLT1 208
Shared decision-making 7
Shawl sign 552
Shiga-toxin producing E.coli 

431

Shigella 428, 429, 431
Shingles 404
Shock 790

anaphylactic 794, 795F
blood pressure 40, 790
cardiogenic 802, 803F
classes 791
ﬂ uid therapy 667
haemorrhagic 790
hypovolaemic 790
septic 792
toxic 388

Short gut syn 580
Shy–Drager syn 494
Sick 

euthyroidism 216
sinus syn 125

Sickle cell 

anaemia 340–1
crisis 341
nephropathy 315

Sideroblastic anaemia 326, 

327F

Sigmoid volvulus 611
Sigmoidoscopy 248
Signs 34–5
Silent 

chest 52
stones 634
Silicosis 201
Silver wiring 560F
Single photon emission 

computed tomography 
(SPECT) 739

_OHCM_10e.indb   887

_OHCM_10e.indb   887

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

888

Sinus 565

bradycardia 98, 122 
pilonidal 630
rhythm 96 
tachycardia 98, 122, 127, 806

Sinusitis 456
Sister Mary Joseph nodule 

710, 711F

Situation syncope 460
Sjögren’s syn 710
Skin 

colour 32, 34 
hand 74, 76
hypercorticolism 225F
important diagnoses 597
lumps 594, 595F
lymphoma 362, 363F
malignant tumours 596
pre-malignant tumours 596 
systemic dis 562, 563F
tags 630
TB 393
tropical disease 440–1
ulcers 660–1
warts 406
Sleep hygiene 29
Sleeping sickness 423
Sleeve gastrectomy 626, 627F
Sliding hernia 255, 612 
Slough 661
Small bowel 

gas patterns 728
lymphoma 362
mucosa 267
obstruction 610, 611F
surgery 580

Small cell lung cancer 174, 176
Small vessel vasculitis 314, 556
Smell 70
Smoke inhalation 847
Smoking 

cessation 93
pack-years 26
Snake bites 843
Snow, J. 431
Social history 26
SOCRATES questions 26
Sod’s law 21, 365F
Sodium 668
Sodium channel blockers 115
Sodium valproate 

dose and side-eff ects 493
drug interactions 757

Soil-transmitted helminths 433
Solar keratoses 596
Sontag, S. 23
Space-occupying lesions 

498, 499

Spasm

coronary 709
infantile 491
oesophagus 250

Spasmodic torticollis 469
Spastic 

gait 467
paraparesis 466

Speciﬁ city 20
Speck, P.W. 535
SPECT 739
Speech 64, 86–7
Spermatocele 651F
Spherocytes 328
Spherocytosis 338, 339F
Sphincter dysfunction 58

Sphygmomanometer 139
Spider naevi 60F, 277F
Spigelian hernia 612 
Spinal cord 

compression 466, 508, 509F, 

528, 543

localizing lesions 447
subacute combined 
degeneration 334

Spine 

cervical injury 447, 828
GALS screen 540
TB 393, 708, 709F
Spiritual pain 535
Spirochete 382
Spirometry 162, 163F
Spleen 

diff erentiating from 
enlarged kidney 63

palpation 61, 62 
percussion 61

Splenectomy 373, 580
Splenomegaly 63, 373, 604
Splinter haemorrhages 76, 

150, 151F

Spondyloarthritides 550–1
Spontaneous 

bacterial peritonitis 276
pneumothorax 54F

Spotted fevers 422
Sputum 53, 162
Squamous cell cancer 596, 

597F

SSRIS 57
ST depression 98
ST elevation 98 
ST elevation MI (STEMI) 118, 120, 

796, 797F
ST segment 96
Stable angina 116 
Staging cancer 523; see also 

TNM staging
Standard deviation 751
Standard error of the mean 751
Staphylococcal pneumonia 168
Staphylococci 388
Staphylococcus aureus 

388, 428
resistant 388

Statins 115
Statistics 20–1, 751
Status epilepticus 826, 827F
Steatorrhoea 59
Steele–Richardson–Olszewski 

syn 494

Stem cell transplantation 358
STEMI 118, 120, 796, 797F
Stenosis 

aortic 146
carotid artery 472
mitral 144
pulmonary 148
tricuspid 148

Stent 565

endovascular 655F
ureteric 641

Stereotactic radiotherapy 527
Sternal notch 50F
Steroids

advice and warnings 227, 376
side eff ects 376, 377
surgery 590 

Stevens–Johnson syn 493, 562, 

710, 711F

Stigler, S. 694
Stokes–Adams attacks 460
Stoma 60F, 565, 582–3 
Stomach cancer 619, 622
Stomatocytosis 338
Stones

renal 638–9, 680
silent 634
submandibular 598
Straight leg test 542
Strangury 80
Streptococcus 

agalactiae 388
bovis 388
milleri 388
pneumoniae 388
pyogenes 388

Stress 

echocardiography 110
incontinence 648

Stridor 48
Stroke 159, 470–5, 746
Strongyloides stercoralis 433
Struvite stones 638, 639F
Sturge–Weber syn 710
Subacute 

combined degeneration of 

spinal cord 334

sclerosing panencephalitis 

406

Subarachnoid haemorrhage 

456, 478–9

Subclavian 

artery aneurysm 598
steal syn 450
vein catheterization 775
Subclinical thyroid dis 221
Subconjunctival haemorrhage 

561
Subcutaneous 
lumps 595
nodules 142

Subdural haematoma 482, 483F
Subfalcian herniation 830
Submandibular stone 598
Sudden unexpected death in 

epilepsy 492
Sugar worker’s lung 198
Suicide, assisted 507, 537
Sulfamethoxazole+ 

trimethoprim 387

Sulfonylureas 208

drug interactions 757

Superior 

alternating hemiplegia 714
gluteal nerve 452
vena cava syn 528

Supraclavicular lymph nodes 

60F

Suprapubic catheterization 762
Supraventricular tachycardia 

806

with aberrancy 128

Surgery 

anaesthesia 572–3 
antibiotic prophylaxis 570
anticoagulated patients 590
bariatric 626, 627F
cancer therapy 525
cardiac 148
day case 592
diabetes 213, 588 
dialysis 307
drains 571 

_OHCM_10e.indb   888

_OHCM_10e.indb   888

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

889

Surgery… continued

DVT risk 578
gastric 622
incisions 565 
infection at surgical site 410
jaundice 590
language 565 
minimally invasive 592 
nil by mouth 585 
post-operative 

complications 576–7, 580 

pre-operative care 566–7
steroid cover 590 
sutures 571 
thyroid 580, 600
wound infection risk 570 
Surgical cricothyroidotomy 772
Sustained ventricular 

tachycardia 122

Sutures 571 
Swallow test 84, 85
Swan-neck deformity 540F
Sweats 29
Sydenham’s chorea 142, 469
Symptoms 28–9
Synacthen® test 226
Syncope 94, 158, 460
Syndrome of inappropriate 
ADH secretion 241, 529, 
664, 673
Syndrome X 206
Synovial ﬂ uid 541
Syphilis 149, 412, 596
Syringe drivers 536
Syringobulbia 516
Syringomyelia 516
Systemic 

enquiry 26, 30–1
lupus erythematosus 149, 

314, 554–5
sclerosis 149, 552
sensory polyneuropathy 212

Systolic 
BP 40
failure 134
T

T inversion 98 
T score 683
T wave 96 
T1-/T2-weighted imaging 734
Tachy brady syn 125
Tachyarrhythmias 122

atrial 806
Tachycardia
atrial 806
AVNRT/AVRT 127
broad complex 128, 129F, 

804, 805F
focal atrial 127
junctional 127, 806
multifocal atrial 127, 806
narrow complex 126, 806–7 
non-sustained ventricular 

122

pacemaker-mediated 133
regular rhythm 127
sinus 98, 122, 127, 806
supraventricular 128, 806
sustained ventricular 122
ventricular 106F, 122, 127, 

128, 129F
Tacrolimus 376
Tactile vocal fremitus 51

Taenia solium 437
Taeniasis 433
Takayasu’s arteritis 556, 712
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy 145
Tap test 78
Tapeworm 433, 437
Tar stains 50F
Tardive 

dyskinesia 468
syn 468

Target cells 328, 343F
Taussig, H. 92F
TB, see Tuberculosis
Teardrop cell 328, 367F
Teeth 246, 247F
Teicoplanin 386
Telangiectasia 246, 708, 709F
Telemetry 125 
Temperature 32
Temporal (giant cell) arteritis 

456, 556
Temporal lobe 
lesions 499
seizures 491

Temporary pacing 132, 776–7
Tenesmus 30, 59
Tension 

headache 456
pneumothorax 54F, 190, 

767, 814

Terminal dribbling 81
Terry’s nails 76, 276
Terson’s syn 478
Testes 

ectopic 652
maldescended 652 
retractile 652 
torsion 652 
tumours 650, 651F 
undescended 652 

Tetanus 436
Tetracyclines 387
Tetralogy of Fallot 157
Thalassaemia 149, 342–3
Thenar wasting 74
Theophylline 

drug interactions 757
therapeutic range 756
Therapeutic ranges 756
Thiamine 268
Thiazide (-like) diuretics 114, 

317, 664

Third-ventricle colloid cyst 498
Thoracic 

aortic dissection 655
outlet 587

Thoracoscopy 164
Threadworm 433
Thrills 39, 40
Thrombin time 346
Thromboangiitis obliterans 696
Thrombocytopenia, immune 345
Thrombocytosis 367
Thromboelastography 347
Thrombolysis 796
Thrombophilia 374
Thrombophlebitis migrans 562
Thrombosis 

cortical vein 480
deep vein 351, 578, 579
intracranial venous 480, 481F
risk factors 375
venous sinus 456, 480

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 

purpura 315
Thrush 246, 247F
Thyroglobulin 216, 531
Thyroglossal cyst 598
Thyroid 

acropachy 218, 562
anatomy 601F 
autoantibodies 216
cancer 600 
ectopic tissue 218
emergencies 834
examination 84–5
eye dis 84, 85, 219
function tests 216–17
goitre 218, 219, 600
isthmus mass 598
lateral aberrant 600 
lumps 600
lymphoma 600
nuclear medicine 738
peroxidase antibody 553
-stimulating hormone 216
subclinical dis 221 
surgery 580, 600
symptoms 31, 221
Thyroidectomy 218
Thyroiditis

De Quervain’s 218
Hashimoto’s 220

Thyrotoxic storm 834, 835F
Thyrotoxicosis 149, 203, 218
Thyrotropin 216
Tibial nerve 452, 502
Tic paradox 700
Tick-borne dis 422
Tics 468
Tietze’s syn 82, 94, 712
Tigecycline 387
Tinea 

capitis 408
pedis 408

Tinel’s test 74, 503
Tinnitus 464
Tiotropium bromide 183
Tissue Doppler imaging 110
TNM staging 523

bladder cancer 647
colorectal cancer 617
lung cancer 176
oesophageal cancer 618

Tobacco, see Smoking 
Tobramycin 387

therapeutic range 756

Todd-Crawford, J. 605
Todd’s palsy 712
Tone 66, 68
Tongue 246

protrusion test 84, 85

Tonic–clonic seizures 491, 492
Tooth colouration 246, 247F
Torsades de pointes 127, 128, 

129F, 804
Torticollis 469
Total bodily ﬂ uid 666
Total lung capacity 164
Tourette syn 700
Tourniquet test 79
Toxic 

adenoma 218
epidermal necrolysis 493
megacolon 729F
multinodular goitre 218
shock 388

_OHCM_10e.indb   889

_OHCM_10e.indb   889

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

890

Toxins

kidney 318
vertigo 462

Toxoplasmosis 400, 425, 

439, 517

TP53 521
Trachea 722
Tracheostomy 580
Trachoma 438
Training 758
Tramadol 533
Transcatheter aortic valve 

implants 147F
Transcutaneous cardiac 

pacing 777

Transfusion reactions 349
Transient ischaemic attack 159, 

476, 477

Transitional cell carcinoma 

644, 646
Transoesophageal 

echocardiography 108, 110

Transplantation 

bone marrow 356 
cardiac 148
liver 276, 277
organ donation 13
renal 308–9
stem cell 358
Transthoracic 

echocardiography 108, 
110, 111F
Transudates 192
Transurethral incision of 

prostate (TUIP) 642
Transurethral resection of 
prostate (TURP) 642

Traube’s sign 47, 146
Travel 

diarrhoea 428, 429
DVT 579
fever in returning travellers 

414–15 

malaria prophylaxis 419
vaccinations 407
Tremor 64, 65, 468, 494
Trench fever 424
Trendelenburg’s test 78
Treponema 

pallidum 412
pertenue 441

Trial without catheter 763
Trichinella 428, 433
Trichomonas vaginalis 413
Trichuriasis 428, 433
Tricuspid 

regurgitation 148
stenosis 148

Trifascicular block 100 
Trigeminal neuralgia 457
Trigeminy 128
Trimethoprim 387
Triple phosphate stones 638
Triple rhythms 44
Triplet 128
Troisier’s sign 619
Tropical

liver dis 435
spastic paraplegia 517
STIs 412

Troponin 119, 688
Trousseau’s sign 529, 678F
True negative 20
True positive 20

Trypanosomiasis 423
TSH receptor antibody 216 
Tube 

feeding 584
inserting nasogastric 759

Tuberculin skin test 394
Tuberculosis 392–5

antibiotic therapy 160F, 394
cardiac 393
CNS 393
colliquativa cutis 661
cutaneous 393
diagnostic tests 394
drug-resistant 395
genitourinary 393
GI 393
HIV 401
latent 392
lymphadenitis 393
miliary 393
pulmonary 393, 394
spinal 393, 708, 709F
urinary tract 297

Tuberous sclerosis complex 320
Tubular disorders 316–17
Tubulointerstitial nephropathy 

318

Tumour; see also Cancer

bladder 646–7
carcinoid 271
carotid body 598 
HIV 517
liver 286–7
lung 174–6
lysis syn 319, 352, 529
malignant connective 

tissue 594

malignant skin 596
markers 530, 531
osteomalacia 684
pituitary 234, 235F
pre-malignant skin 596
salivary gland 599
space-occupying lesions 

498, 499

suppressor genes 520
testicular 650, 651F
Wilms’ 644
Tungiasis 441
Tuning fork tests 464
Turner’s syn 149
Type V hyperlipoproteinaemia 

691
Typhoid 415
Typhus 422

U

Uhthoff ’s phenomenon 497
Ulcer 565

anal 630
aphthous 246, 247F
Chiclero’s 440
duodenal 252, 253F
foot 212
gastric 252
genital 412
pressure 473F
skin 660–1
venous 660, 661
Ulcerative colitis 262–3
Ulnar nerve 453, 502, 503
Ultrasound 736, 737F 

Ultrasound… continued 

endoscopic 742 
genitourinary 744, 745F 
GI 742
kidney 737F, 744, 745F 
kidney obstruction 641F
liver 737F
urinary tract 744
vascular 740 

Umbilical hernia 612 
Uncal herniation 830
Unconjugated 

hyperbilirubinaemia 272

Undescended testes 652
Unfractionated heparin 350
Unstable (crescendo) angina 

116, 118 

Upper GI 

bleeding 57, 256–7, 820, 821F
cancer 522 
endoscopy 248, 249

Upper limb

neurological examination 

66–7

peripheral nerve tests 453

Upper motor neuron 446
Uralgia 80
Urate 680

nephropathy 319
stones 638, 639, 680

Ureteric stent 641
Ureterograms 744
Urethral 

caruncle 80
stricture 649 

Urethritis, non-gonococcal 413
Urge incontinence 648
Uric acid crystals 295
Urinary 

calculi 638–9, 680 
catheterization 297, 762–3
changes 81
frequency 80
incontinence 648–9
infection 296–7, 410
malignancies 522, 644
obstruction 640–1
plain X-ray 728
proteins 293, 294, 686
symptoms 293
TB 297
US 744

Urine 

albuminuria 686
bacteriuria 296
casts 295
cloudy 81
crystals 295
dipstick 294 
ﬂ uids for poor output 300, 667
haematuria 81, 293, 294, 647
haemoglobinuria 336, 686
haemosiderinuria 336
microalbuminuria 294, 686
microscopy 295
myoglobinuria 686 
oliguria 81, 293, 576
pneumaturia 81
post-operative 576
proteins 686 
proteinuria 293, 294
reference intervals 753

cardiac (echo) 108, 110, 111F, 

153F, 740 

Urostomy 582
US, see Ultrasound

_OHCM_10e.indb   890

_OHCM_10e.indb   890

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

891

V

Vaccination 

hepatitis B 287
immunosuppression 407
pneumococcal 167
schedule 407
splenectomy 373
Vaginal discharge 413
Valgus deformity 540
Validity 20
Valproate 

dose and side-eff ects 493
drug interactions 757
Valsalva manoeuvre 46
Valve 

dis 110, 144–8
replacements 148

Vancomycin 386
intermediate 

Staphylococcus aureus 
(VISA) 388

resistant Staphylococcus 

aureus (VRSA) 388
therapeutic range 756

Varenicline 93
Variable rate intravenous 
insulin infusion 589
Variable vessel vasculitis 556
Variant 

angina (Prinzmetal’s) 116, 

117, 708, 709

CJD 696, 697

Variceal bleeds 257
Varicella zoster virus 404, 501
Varicocele 650, 651F
Varicose veins 658, 659
Variegate porphyria 692
Varus deformity 540
Vascular 

access device infection 410
CT 740
dementia 486
MRI 740 
parkinsonism 494
US 740

Vasculitis 314, 556, 557
Vasodilators 114
Vasovagal syncope 460
Vector-borne dis 421, 422–3
Veins

leg 658F
neck 587F
varicose 658, 659
Venepuncture 535
Venezuelan HF 426
Venous 

sinus thrombosis 456, 480
ulcers 660, 661

Ventilation/perfusion scan 738
Ventilator-associated 
pneumonia 410

Ventricular 

extrasystoles 128, 804
ﬁ brillation 122, 128, 129F, 804
septal defect 122, 156
single ventricle 157
tachycardia 106F, 122, 127, 

128, 129F
Venturi mask 189
Vertebrobasilar circulation 450

Vertigo 36, 462
Vesicular breath sounds 52
Vestibular 

neuronitis 462
Schwannoma 462, 463F, 514

Vibration tests 67, 69
Vibrio cholerae 428, 430
Video capsule endoscopy 248
Vincent’s angina 712
Viral 

gastroenteritis 428
haemorrhagic fever 426–7
hepatitis 278–9, 291
infections 398–403, 404–6
pneumonia 168

Viridans streptococci 388
Virilism 230
VISA 388
Visceral leishmaniasis 423
Vision 

acuity 70 
driving 159
disturbance 64
ﬁ elds 70, 71
loss 73
Vitamin 
A 268
B1 268
B2 268
B6 268
B12 268, 334, 335F
C 268
D 268, 676, 684
D-resistant rickets 684
D supplements 244
E 268
K 268, 351
Vitiligo 562, 563F
Vocal resonance 51
Voiding diffi  culty 80, 81
Volvulus 565
Vomiting 56, 250
Von Hippel–Lindau syn 320, 

712, 173F

Waterhouse–Friderichsen’s 

syn 714

Weber 

test 464
syn 714

Wegener’s granulomatosis 

556, 714
Weight loss 35, 245
Weil’s dis 425
Wells score 578
Wenckebach phenomenon 98, 

99F, 122
Wernicke’s 

dysphasia 86
encephalopathy 714

West Nile virus 437
Wet gangrene 660
Wheeze 52
Whipple’s 
dis 716
procedure 270, 271F
triad 214
Whipworm 433
Whisper test 464
Whispering pectoriloquy 51
White cell 
cast 295
diff erential count 330

White-coat hypertension 138
WHO analgesic ladder 532, 575F
Whole blood transfusion 348
Whooping cough 391
Williams syn 149
Willis, T. 451
Wilms’ tumour 644
Wilson’s dis 285
Wolff -Parkinson-White syn 127, 

133, 806

Wound infection risk 570 
Writer’s cramp 469
Wuchereria bancrofti 421

X

X-linked hypophosphataemic 

Von Recklinghausen’s dis 

rickets 684

514, 515

Von Willebrand’s dis 712
VQ scan 738
VRSA 388
W

Waist circumference 245
Waldenström’s 

macroglobulinaemia 370

Waldeyer’s ring lymphoma 362
Walking problems 28
Wallenberg’s lateral medullary 

syn 712, 713F

Ward round 10
Warfarin 350
dose 351
drug interactions 757
INR targets 351
surgery 590

Warm autoimmune haemolytic 

anaemia 338

Warts 406, 630
Water 

control 668
deprivation test 240, 241

Waterhammer pulse 42

X-ray, ﬁ rst 618F; see also Chest 

X-ray; Plain X-ray

Xanthelasma 41, 60F, 690, 691F
Xanthomata 41, 690
Xenografts 148
Xerophthalmia 268

Y

Yalow, R. 662F
Yaws 441
Yellow fever 420
Yellow ﬂ ags 559
Yersinia 

enterocolitica 428, 431
pestis 425
Z

Zanamivir 396
Zellweger syn 716
Zidovudine, drug interactions 

757

Ziehl–Neelsen stain 382
Zika virus 421
Zinc 268, 679
Zollinger–Ellison syn 716
Zoonoses 424–5

_OHCM_10e.indb   891

_OHCM_10e.indb   891

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

892

Early warning score 

Early warning scores are scoring systems based on physiological parameters. The 
magnitude of the given score reﬂ ects how far the parameter varies from normal.
The collated score from diff erent parameters is used in:
  • the assesssment of acute illness
  • the detection of a clinical deterioration
  • the initiation of a timely and competent clinical response.
A standardized National Early Warning Score (NEWS) is recommended for use across 
the NHS.1 The components of the NEWS are detailed in ﬁ g A1. An appropriate clinical 
response to the aggregate score from ﬁ g A1 is outlined in ﬁ g A2.

Fig A1  National Early Warning Score for adult patients.  © RCP 2012.

1  Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Scores (NEWS): standardising the assessment of 
acute illness severity in the NHS. London: RCP, 2012.

_OHCM_10e.indb   892

_OHCM_10e.indb   892

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

NEWS SCORE

FREQUENCY OF
MONITORING

CLINICAL RESPONSE

893

0

Minimum 12 hourly

• Continue routine NEWS monitoring with

every set of observations

Total:
1-4

Minimum 4-6 hourly

•

Inform registered nurse who must assess
the patient;

• Registered nurse to decide if increased

frequency of monitoring and / or
escalation of clinical care is required;

Total:
5 or more

or

3 in one
parameter

Increased frequency
to a minimum
of 1 hourly

• Registered nurse to urgently inform

the medical team caring for the patient;

• Urgent assessment by a clinician

with core competencies to assess acutely
ill patients;

• Clinical care in an environment with

monitoring facilities;

Total:
7
or more

Continuous monitoring of
vital signs

• Registered nurse to immediately inform
the medical team caring for the patient –
this should be at least at Specialist
Registrar level;

• Emergency assessment by a clinical
team with critical care competencies,
which also includes a practitioner/s with
advanced airway skills;

• Consider transfer of Clinical care to a
level 2 or 3 care facility, i.e. higher
dependency or ITU;

Fig A2  Clinical response to NEWS triggers.  © RCP 2012.

Early  warning  scores  are  tools  to  aid  assessment.  They  do  not  replace  clinical 
judgement: use yours and respect the clinical opinion of others.
Refer to local early warning scores where available. 

_OHCM_10e.indb   893

_OHCM_10e.indb   893

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

894

Cardiac arrest: advanced life support algorithm 2015

Fig A3  Cardiac arrest: advanced life support algorithm 2015.

Reproduced with the kind permission of the Resuscitation Council (UK), © 2014–6.

_OHCM_10e.indb   894

_OHCM_10e.indb   894

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Cardiorespiratory arrest
 Ensure the safety of the patient and yourself.
 Conﬁ rm diagnosis: a patient who is unresponsive and not breathing properly is in 

cardiac arrest (a manual pulse check is inaccurate and not recommended).

Basic life support Shout for help. Ask someone to call the arrest team and bring the 
deﬁ brillator. Note the time. ABC:
 Airway: Head tilt (if no spine injury) and chin lift/jaw thrust.
 Breathing: Look, listen, and feel for breathing for no more than 10 seconds. If there 

is any doubt whether breathing is normal, proceed to chest compressions.

 Chest compressions: Place the heel of one hand on the centre of the chest (lower 
half  of  the  stenum).  Place  your  second  hand  on  top  and  interlock  ﬁ ngers.  Use 
straight arms. Give compressions at a rate of 100–120/min. Aim to compress the 
sternum 5–6cm. After 30 compressions give 2 rescue breaths. Do not interrupt 
compressions >10s. Continue with a ratio of 30:2 until deﬁ brillator is available.

Advanced life support See algorithm ﬁ g A3.
  • Continue  chest  compressions  while  adhesive  deﬁ brillation/monitoring  pads  are 

put in place. Plan all actions before pausing chest compressions.

  • Stop chest compression for <5s to assess rhythm. Determine whether the rhythm is 
shockable (VF/pulseless VT) or non-shockable (asystole, pulseless electrical activity).

Shockable rhythm: VF/pulseless VT
 A single person performs uninterrupted chest compressions while everyone else 

prepares for deﬁ brillation: stand clear, move oxygen delivery device 1m away.
 Select the appropriate energy on the deﬁ brillator (150J or manufacturer's guide-
lines). When deﬁ brillator is charged and safety check complete, the rescuer per-
forming chest compressions stands clear and the shock is delivered.

 CPR is resumed immediately (30:2). Reassess pulse/rhythm only after 2 minutes of CPR.
 Repeat if shockable rhythm remains. Give drugs after 3 shocks (see Drugs, this topic).
Non-shockable rhythm: asystole/pulseless electrical activity (PEA)
 Continue CPR 30:2. Obtain IV access and secure airway. Once airway secure switch 

to continuous compressions and ventilation. Give adrenaline 1mg IV.

 Check rhythm every 2 minutes.
 Consider reversible causes (4HS and 4TS: hypoxia, hypovolaemia, hyper/hypokalae-
mia/other metabolic derangement, hypothermia, thrombosis, tension pneumotho-
rax, tamponade, toxins).

Drugs
  • Give adrenaline 1mg IV every 3–5 mins for both shockable (from 3rd shock) and non-
shockable rhythms. In practice this means at every other rhythm check or shock.1
  • In shockable rhythms give amiodarone 300mg IV after 3 deﬁ brillation attempts. 

Consider a further 150mg IV after 5 shocks. Lidocaine is an alternative.

Discontinuing resuscitation Needs clinical judgement: what is the likelihood of 
achieving  a  successful  return  of  spontaneous  circulation?  If  there  is  a  shockable 
rhythm or a reversible cause then attempts are usually continued. It is reasonable 
to discontinue if asystole >20mins without a reversible cause. Ask for the opinion of 
others in the resuscitation team.
Resuscitation decisions Consider, discuss, and record CPR decisions:
  • at the request of a patient with capacity
  • as part of end-of-life care (p12, p536)
  • in deteriorating, severe illness.
Your patient should be involved in decisions about CPR (unless it would cause physi-
cal or psychological harm). Explain your clinical decision to them, including futility.
Do not make judgements about the quality of life of others based on your own 
perception.
1  Meta-analysis fails to show that adrenaline increases survival to hospital discharge (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/24193240). RCT results are awaited (Paramedic 2: The Adrenaline Trial ISRCTN 73485024).

_OHCM_10e.indb   e

_OHCM_10e.indb   e

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Useful doses for the new doctor

These pages outline the typical adult doses of drugs that a foundation doctor will 
be called upon to prescribe. Refer to local guidelines ﬁ rst. If in any doubt, consult 
a drug formulary (eg British National Formulary www.bnf.org) especially if eGFR or 
weight <50kg. Always check allergies before prescribing.
Drug
Dose and frequency
Analgesics
Paracetamol
Ibuprofen

Notes

1g/6h PO/PR/IV, max. 4g/24h
400mg/8h PO, max 
2.4g/24h
50mg/8h PO/PR

Diclofenac 
sodium

Avoid if hepatic impairment.
SE: gastritis; bronchospasm; 
AKI; ﬂ uid retention; hypersens-
itivity.
CI: peptic ulcer; NSAID-induced 
asthma; coag ulopathy; ad-
vanced CKD; heart failure.
Chronic pain, eg malignancy, 
may require higher doses (see 
p536). Reduce dose if eGFR.
Care in head injury, as may hin-
der neurological assessment.
SE: N&V; constipation; drowsi-
ness; hypotension; respiratory 
depression, dependence.
CI: respiratory depression.

SE: rash; hypersensitivity and 
anaphylaxis; diarrhoea.
CI: history of allergy.

IV only if oral treatment 
not possible. Beware of 
cytochrome P450 interactions 
(not azithromycin).
SE: N&V; diarrhoea; cholestasis; 
QT prolongation; pancreatitis
SE: hypersensitivity; hepatotox-
icity; may exacerbate myasthe-
nia gravis and SLE.
CI: pregnancy; age <12y.
IV only if oral treatment not 
possible.

Adjust dose for renal function.
SE: nephrotoxicity (correct 
volume depletion); electrolyte 
disturbance; ototoxicity.
CI: 1st trimester (folate 
antagonist).

SE: drowsiness.
SE: extrapyramidal SE, espe-
cially in young adults.
SE: constipation; headache
CI: long QT syndrome.

Codeine 
phosphate
Dihydroco-
deine tartrate
Morphine
Oxycodone 
Tramadol

30–60mg/4h PO/IM, max 
240mg/24h
30mg/4–6h PO, or 
50mg/4–6h IM/SC
5–10mg/4h PO/IM
2.5–5mg/4h PO
50–100mg/4h PO/IM/IV

500mg/6h PO (max 4g/24h)

Antibiotics (refer to local guidelines)
Phenoxymeth-
ylpenicillin
Benzylpenicillin 0.6–1.2g/6h IV/IM 
Flucloxacillin

250–500mg/6h PO/IM
1g/6h IV
250–500mg/6h PO
Erythromycin
Clarithromycin 250–500mg/6h PO
Azithromycin

500mg/24h PO

Doxycycline

200mg/24h PO as a single dose 
then 100mg/24h

Metronidazole

Gentamicin

400mg/8h PO, or
500mg/8h IV, or
1g/8h PR
5mg/kg/24h IV adjusted to 
serum concentration

Trimethoprim 200mg/12h PO

Anti-emetics
Cyclizine
Metoclop-
ramide
Ondansetron

50mg/8h PO/IM/IV
10mg/8h PO/IM/IV

4–8mg/8–12h PO/IV

_OHCM_10e.indb   f

_OHCM_10e.indb   f

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

Dose and frequency

Drug
Acute asthma/COPD
Salbutamol

5mg via nebulizer as required 
according to clinical response

Ipratropium 
bromide
Prednisolone 

500mcg/4–6h via nebulizer

30–50mg/24h (refer to local 
guidelines). 

Antihistamines
4mg/4–6h PO
Chlorphena-
In anaphylaxis: 10mg IM
mine
10mg/24h PO
Cetirizine
10mg/24h PO
Loratidine
Gastric acid-reducing drugs
Ranitidine

150mg/12h PO or 50mg/8h IV

Notes

Oxygen-driven nebulizer in 
asthma, air-driven in COPD with 
appropriate concentration of 
oxygen provided in addition.
SE: tachycardia; hypokalaemia. 
SE: GI disturbance, cough.

Oral steroids are as eff ective 
as IV. Specify course length.
SE: DM; peptic ulceration; psy-
chosis; BP; ﬂ uid retention.

SE: drowsiness; urinary reten-
tion; dry mouth; blurred vision; 
GI disturbance.

SE: diarrhoea; dizziness; 
cholestasis.

Omeprazole
Lansoprazole
Pantoprazole

20–40mg/24h PO or 40mg/24h IV SE: GI disturbance; hyper-
15–30mg/24h PO
20–40mg/24h PO or 40mg/24h IV

sensitivity.
 May mask symptoms of 
gastric cancer.

Heparins (refer to local guidelines)
Unfractionated 
heparin
Enoxaparin

DVT prophylaxis: 
5000U/8–12h SC
DVT prophylaxis:
20–40mg/24h SC
DVT/PE treatment:
1.5mg/kg/24h SC
DVT prophylaxis:
3500U/24h SC
DVT/PE treatment:
175U/kg per 24h SC
DVT prophylaxis: 
2500–5000U/24h SC 
DVT/PE treatment:
200U/kg/d SC

Tinzaparin

Dalteparin

Dose needs correcting for 
renal function and pregnancy 
(see local guidelines).
SE: bleeding; throm-
bocytopenia (watch for  by 
30% or thrombosis 5–10 days 
into treatment); hyperkalae-
mia; osteo porosis after pro-
longed use (risk with LMWH).
CI: heparin-induced thrombo-
cytopenia; bleeding disorders; 
epidural anaesthesia, recent 
cerebral bleed; recent trauma 
or surgery; active bleeding.

Tranquillizers for non-psychotic behavioural disturbance
Lorazepam

1–2mg PO/IM

De-escalation techniques 
ﬁ rst. Medication only to risk 
of harm to self/others. Risk 
of medication in frail, elderly, 
comorbid conditions. Wait 60 
min for response. Seek expert 
help if needs repeat dose.
SE: respiratory depression; 
drowsiness; ataxia; confusion; GI 
disturbance; urinary retention.
CI: respiratory disease

See also: prescribing in palliative care (pp532–537), laxatives (p260), inhalers (p183), 
digoxin (p115), insulin (p589), ﬂ uid (p666), oxygen prescribing (p189), naloxone (p842).

_OHCM_10e.indb   g

_OHCM_10e.indb   g

02/05/2017   19:09

02/05/2017   19:09

